                                         Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 70 (2021) 1031-1116         Submitted 08/2020; published 03/2021




                                                 Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for
                                                              Reinforcement Learning

                                         Daniel Furelos-Blanco                                             d.furelos-blanco18@imperial.ac.uk
                                         Mark Law                                                                 mark.law09@imperial.ac.uk
                                         Department of Computing
                                         Imperial College London
                                         London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom




arXiv:2009.03855v2 [cs.AI] 16 Mar 2021
                                         Anders Jonsson                                                               anders.jonsson@upf.edu
                                         Department of Information and Communication Technologies
                                         Universitat Pompeu Fabra
                                         Roc Boronat 138, 08018 Barcelona, Spain
                                         Krysia Broda                                                                 k.broda@imperial.ac.uk
                                         Alessandra Russo                                                             a.russo@imperial.ac.uk
                                         Department of Computing
                                         Imperial College London
                                         London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom


                                                                                            Abstract
                                                  In this paper we present ISA, an approach for learning and exploiting subgoals in
                                              episodic reinforcement learning (RL) tasks. ISA interleaves reinforcement learning with
                                              the induction of a subgoal automaton, an automaton whose edges are labeled by the task’s
                                              subgoals expressed as propositional logic formulas over a set of high-level events. A subgoal
                                              automaton also consists of two special states: a state indicating the successful completion
                                              of the task, and a state indicating that the task has finished without succeeding. A state-
                                              of-the-art inductive logic programming system is used to learn a subgoal automaton that
                                              covers the traces of high-level events observed by the RL agent. When the currently
                                              exploited automaton does not correctly recognize a trace, the automaton learner induces a
                                              new automaton that covers that trace. The interleaving process guarantees the induction of
                                              automata with the minimum number of states, and applies a symmetry breaking mechanism
                                              to shrink the search space whilst remaining complete. We evaluate ISA in several grid-
                                              world and continuous state space problems using different RL algorithms that leverage the
                                              automaton structures. We provide an in-depth empirical analysis of the automaton learning
                                              performance in terms of the traces, the symmetry breaking and specific restrictions imposed
                                              on the final learnable automaton. For each class of RL problem, we show that the learned
                                              automata can be successfully exploited to learn policies that reach the goal, achieving an
                                              average reward comparable to the case where automata are not learned but handcrafted
                                              and given beforehand.


                                         1. Introduction
                                         Reinforcement learning (RL) is a family of algorithms for controlling an agent that acts
                                         in an environment with the purpose of maximizing some measure of cumulative reward it
                                         receives. These algorithms have played a key role in recent breakthroughs like human-level
                                         video game playing from raw sensory input (Mnih et al., 2015) and mastering complex

                                         ©2021 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




board games (Silver et al., 2018). However, despite of these impressive advancements, RL
algorithms still struggle to discover and exploit the structure of a task. A possible way to
represent these structures is through (temporal) abstractions.
    Finite-state automata have been extensively used as a means for abstraction across dif-
ferent areas of Artificial Intelligence (AI), including the control of agents in robotics (Brooks,
1989) and games (Buckland, 2004), as well as automated planning (Bonet et al., 2009; Hu
& De Giacomo, 2011; Segovia Aguas et al., 2018). In the context of RL, automata have
been used for multiple purposes, such as to represent abstract decision hierarchies (Parr
& Russell, 1997; Leonetti et al., 2012), be used as memory in partially observable envi-
ronments (Meuleau et al., 1999; Toro Icarte et al., 2019), or ease the interpretation of the
policies encoded by a neural network (Koul et al., 2019). In particular, Toro Icarte et al.
(2018) recently proposed reward machines (RMs), which are automata that play the role of
reward functions while revealing the task’s structure to the RL agent. This approach has
drawn attention from the community and several works have recently attempted to learn
RMs (Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020) or similar kinds of automata (Furelos-Blanco
et al., 2020; Gaon & Brafman, 2020).
    In this paper we propose ISA (Induction of Subgoal Automata for Reinforcement Learn-
ing), a method for learning and exploiting a minimal automaton that encodes the subgoals
of an episodic goal-oriented task. Indeed, these automata are called subgoal automata since
each transition is labeled by a subgoal, which is a boolean formula over a set of high-level
events that characterizes the task. A (possibly empty) set of high-level events is sensed by
the agent at each step. Besides, subgoal automata have accepting and rejecting states. The
former indicate the successful completion of the task, while the latter indicate that the task
has been finished but without succeeding.
    We represent subgoal automata using Answer Set Programming (ASP, Gelfond & Kahl,
2014), a logic programming language. A state-of-the-art inductive logic programming (ILP)
system for learning ASP programs, ILASP (Law et al., 2015b), is used to learn the automata.
Specifically, given a set of traces of high-level events, and sufficiently large numbers of
automaton states and allowed edges from one state to another, ILASP learns the transitions
between states such that the traces are correctly recognized. For instance, all those traces
achieving the task’s goal must finish in the accepting state. To speed up automaton learning,
we devise a symmetry breaking mechanism that discards multiple equivalent automata in
order to shrink the search space.
    ISA interleaves automaton learning and reinforcement learning. The automaton learner
is executed only when the RL agent finds a trace not correctly recognized by the current
automaton. The interleaving scheme guarantees that the induced subgoal automaton is
minimal (i.e., has the minimum number of states).
    Importantly, subgoal automata address two types of abstraction: state abstraction and
action abstraction (Konidaris, 2019; Ho, Abel, Griffiths, & Littman, 2019). The set of
automaton states is an abstraction of the original state space: they determine the level of
completion of a given task. That is, they indicate which subgoals have been achieved and
which remain to be achieved. Conversely, the subgoals labeling the edges can be seen as local
objectives of abstract actions. The latter has been successfully addressed by hierarchical
reinforcement learning (HRL, Barto & Mahadevan, 2003), which divides a single task into
several subtasks that can be solved separately. We use HRL methods to exploit subgoal

                                              1032
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




automata by defining one subtask per subgoal, as well as methods that exploit similar
automaton structures like the aforementioned reward machines. All in all, abstractions in
the form of subgoal automata can potentially:

  1. Make learning simpler since mastering a subtask should be easier than mastering the
     whole task.

  2. Allow for better exploration since the agent moves more quickly between abstract
     states (i.e., different levels of completion of the task).

  3. Allow for generalization between different tasks if they share common subtasks.

  4. Handle partial observability by acting as an external memory.

    We evaluate ISA in several grid-world and continuous state space tasks. We show that a
subgoal automaton can be simultaneously induced from interaction and exploited by differ-
ent RL algorithms to learn a policy that achieves the task’s goal. Importantly, the perfor-
mance achieved by ISA in the limit is comparable to that where a handcrafted automaton is
given beforehand. Furthermore, we make a thorough analysis of how reinforcement learning
affects automaton learning and vice versa.
    The description of our approach previously appeared in a conference paper (Furelos-
Blanco et al., 2020). Compared to the conference version, the present paper includes the
following novel material:

   • A method for breaking symmetries in our automata that speeds up the automaton
     learning phase.

   • An extensive experimental analysis of our interleaving method. The experiments
     include two new domains, one of which is characterized by a continuous state space
     and, thus, requires the use of function approximation techniques. Besides, we also
     evaluate a hierarchical RL algorithm that was not included in the conference version
     of the paper.

   • A detailed description of recent related work, some of which was not yet available at
     the time of submission of the conference paper.

   • A discussion on the limitations of our work and ideas to be developed in future work.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the background of our work.
The formalization of the main components of our approach (the tasks, the automata and
the traces) is given in Section 3. Section 4 describes how subgoal automata and traces are
represented using ASP, while Section 5 explains how this class of automata can be learned
from traces. In Section 6 we introduce a set of constraints for checking and guaranteeing that
a given automaton complies with specific structural properties (determinism and symmetry
breaking constraints). Section 7 details how automaton learning is interleaved with different
RL algorithms that exploit the resulting automata. The effectiveness of our method across
different tasks is evaluated in Section 8, followed by a discussion on related work in Section 9.
Section 10 concludes the paper and suggests directions for future work.

                                              1033
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




2. Background
In this section we briefly summarize the key background concepts of reinforcement learning
and inductive learning of answer set programs, which are the main building blocks of our
approach.

2.1 Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton & Barto, 1998) is a family of algorithms for learning
to act in an unknown environment. Typically, this learning process is formulated as a
Markov Decision Process (MDP), i.e., a tuple M = hS, A, p, r, γi, where S is a finite set of
states, A is a finite set of actions, p : S × A → ∆(S) is a transition probability function,1
r : S×A×S → R is a reward function, and γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor. At time t, the agent
observes state st ∈ S, executes action at ∈ A, transitions to the next state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at )
and receives reward r(st , at , st+1 ). We consider episodic MDPs that terminate in a given
set of terminal states, which can be either goal states or undesirable states (i.e., dead-ends).
Let ST ⊆ S be the set of terminal states and SG ⊆ ST the set of goal states. The aim is to
find a policy π : S → A, a mapping from states                       2 that maximizes the expected
                                                       Pnto actions,
sum of discounted reward (or return), Rt = E[ k=t γ k−t rk ], where n is the last step of the
episode.
    In model-free RL the transition probability function p and reward function r are un-
known to the agent, and a policy is learned via interaction with the environment. Q-learning
(Watkins, 1989) computes an action-value function Q(s, a) = E[Rt |st = s, at = a] that es-
timates the return from each state-action pair when following an approximately optimal
policy. In each iteration t the estimates are updated as
                                                                                            
                                                                             0
          Q(st , at ) = Q(st , at ) + α r(st , at , st+1 ) + γ max
                                                                0
                                                                   Q(st+1 , a ) − Q(st , at ) ,
                                                                a

where α is a learning rate and st+1 is the state after applying at in st . The term r(st , at , st+1 )+
γ maxa0 Q(st+1 , a0 ) is the target, while the whole expression within parentheses is the Bell-
man error. Usually, an -greedy policy selects a random action with probability  and the
action maximizing Q(s, a) otherwise. The policy is defined as the action that maximizes
Q(s, a) in each s.
    In this work we focus on Partially Observable MDPs (POMDPs, Kaelbling et al., 1998),
which are MDPs where the agent cannot observe the real state of the environment. Since
we later use the terms “observable” and “observation” to denote other concepts, we refer
to unobserved states as latent, and to observed states as visible. Formally, a POMDP is
a tuple MΣ = hS, Σ, A, p, r, γ, νi, where S, A, p, r and γ are defined as for MDPs, Σ is
the set of visible states, and ν : S → ∆(Σ) is a mapping from latent states to probability
distributions over visible states. In the episodic setting, just like episodic MDPs, a POMDP
includes a set of terminal states ST ⊆ S and a set of goal states SG ⊆ ST . We model the
interaction between the agent and an episodic POMDP environment as follows. At time
t, the latent state is st ∈ S, and the agent observes a tuple σt = hσtΣ , σtT , σtG i, where
σtΣ ∈ Σ is a visible state such that σtΣ ∼ ν(·|st ), σtT ∈ {⊥, >} indicates whether st is
1. For any finite set X, ∆(X) = {µ ∈ RX | x µ(x) = 1, µ(x) ≥ 0 (∀x)} is the probability simplex over X.
                                            P
2. In this work we learn deterministic policies, but it could be extended to support stochastic policies too.


                                                   1034
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




terminal (i.e., σtT = I[st ∈ ST ]),3 and σtG ∈ {⊥, >} indicates whether st is a goal state
(i.e., σtG = I[st ∈ SG ]).4 If the state is non-terminal, the agent executes action at ∈ A, the
environment transitions to the next latent state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ), and the agent observes
a new tuple σt+1 and receives reward r(st , at , st+1 ). The policy π : Σ∗ → A becomes a
mapping from histories of visible states to actions. Note that the history is required since
the Markov property might not hold for the states in Σ and, similarly, the reward function
becomes non-Markovian over Σ.
Options (Sutton et al., 1999) address temporal abstraction in RL. Given an MDP
M = hS, A, p, r, γi, an option is a tuple ω = hIω , πω , βω i where Iω ⊆ S is the option’s
initiation set, πω : S → A is the option’s policy, and βω : S → [0, 1] is the option’s
termination condition.5 An option is available in state s ∈ S if s ∈ Iω . If the option is
started, the actions are chosen according to πω . The option terminates at a given state
s ∈ S with probability βω (s). Note that an action a ∈ A can be viewed as an option that
terminates in any state with probability 1.
    An MDP whose action set is extended with options is a Semi-Markov Decision Process
(SMDP). The learning methods for SMDPs require minimal changes with respect to MDPs.
The counterpart of Q-learning for SMDPs is called SMDP Q-learning (Bradtke & Duff,
1994). The update it performs when an option ω has terminated is:
                                                                                      
                                                                     0
               Q(st , ωt ) = Q(st , ωt ) + α r + γ k max
                                                      0
                                                         Q(s t+k , ω   ) − Q(st , ωt )   ,
                                                        ω


where k is the number of steps between st and st+k , and r = kj=1 γ j−1 rt+j is the cumulative
                                                             P
discounted reward over this time. Similarly to Q-learning, α is a learning rate and st+k is
the state in which option ωt terminates.
    Intra-option learning (Kaelbling, 1993; Sutton et al., 1998) is an often used method for
learning option policies. During intra-option learning, an experience hst , at , rt+1 , st+1 i gen-
erated by the current option can be used not only to update its policy, but also other options’
policies. Since experience accumulates faster, the convergence speed is often increased.

2.2 Inductive Learning of Answer Set Programs
In this section we describe answer set programming (ASP) and the ILASP system for
learning ASP programs.

2.2.1 Answer Set Programming
Answer Set Programming (ASP, Gelfond & Kahl, 2014) is a declarative programming lan-
guage for knowledge representation and reasoning. An ASP problem is expressed in a logical
format and the models (called answer sets) of its representation provide the solutions to
that problem. In the paragraphs below we describe the main concepts of ASP used in the
paper.
3. The indicator function I(x) returns true (>) if the condition x holds, and false (⊥) otherwise.
4. Note that σ T is true whenever σ G is true since SG ⊆ ST (i.e., all goal states are terminal).
5. In the case of POMDPs, the option components are defined using the set of visible states Σ instead of
   the set of latent states S.


                                                 1035
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




      An atom is an expression of the form p(t1 , . . . , tn ) where p is a predicate symbol of arity
n and t1 , . . . , tn are terms. If n = 0, we omit the parentheses. In this paper, a term can be
either a variable or a constant. By convention, variables are denoted using upper case (e.g.,
X or Y), while constants are written in lower case (e.g., coffee or mail). An atom is said
to be ground if none of its terms is a variable. A literal is an atom a or its negation not a.
The not symbol is called negation as failure.
      An ASP program P is a set of rules. In this paper, we assume that this set is formed by
normal rules, choice rules and constraints. Given an atom h and a set of literals b1 , . . . , bn ,
a normal rule is of the form h : - b1 , . . . , bn , where h is the head and b1 , . . . , bn is the
body of the rule. A normal rule with an empty body is a fact. A choice rule is of the
form lb{h1 , . . . , hm }ub : - b1 , . . . , bn , where lb and ub are integers, h1 , . . . , hm are atoms and
b1 , . . . , bn are literals. Rules of the form : - b1 , . . . , bn are called constraints.
      Given a set of ground atoms (or interpretation) I, a ground normal rule is satisfied if
the head is satisfied by I when the body literals are satisfied by I. The head of a choice
rule is satisfied by I if and only if the number of satisfied atoms in the head is between lb
and ub (both included), i.e., lb ≤ |I ∩ {h1 , . . . , hm }| ≤ ub. A ground constraint is satisfied
if the body is not satisfied by I. The reduct P I of a program P with respect to I is built
in 4 steps (Law et al., 2015a):6

   1. Replace the heads of all constraints with ⊥.

   2. For each choice rule R:

          • if its head is not satisfied, replace its head with ⊥, or
          • if its head is satisfied then remove R and for each atom h in the head of R such
            that h ∈ I, add the rule h : - body(R) (where body(R) is the set of literals forming
            the body of R).

   3. Remove any rule R such that the body of R contains the negation of an atom in I.

   4. Remove all negation from any remaining rules.

An interpretation I is an answer set of P if and only if (1) I satisfies the rules in P I , and
(2) no subset of I satisfies the rules in P I .

Example 2.1. Given the following ASP program formed by two facts and two normal rules
                 
              P = p(X) : - not q(X), r(X). q(X) : - not p(X), r(X). r(1). r(2). ,

the following four interpretations are all the answer sets of P :

                        {r(1). r(2). p(1). p(2).} {r(1). r(2). p(1). q(2).}
                        {r(1). r(2). p(2). q(1).} {r(1). r(2). q(1). q(2).}

Note that the interpretation {r(1). r(2). p(1). p(2). q(1). q(2).} is not an answer set.
6. This is a non-standard form of building the reduct, but it is proven to be equivalent (Law et al., 2015a)
   to the standard definitions (e.g., Calimeri et al., 2020).


                                                   1036
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




2.2.2 ILASP
ILASP (Inductive Learning of Answer Set Programs, Law et al., 2015b) is an inductive logic
programming system for learning ASP programs from partial answer sets.
     A context-dependent partial interpretation (CDPI, Law et al., 2016) is a pair hheinc , eexc i,
 ctx
e i, where:
   • heinc , eexc i is a pair of sets of atoms, called a partial interpretation. We refer to einc
     and eexc as the inclusions and exclusions respectively.
   • ectx is an ASP program, called a context.
A program P accepts a CDPI hheinc , eexc i, ectx i if and only if there is an answer set A of
P ∪ ectx such that einc ⊆ A and eexc ∩ A = ∅.
   An ILASP task (Law et al., 2016) is a tuple T = hB, SM , hE + , E − ii where
   • B is the ASP background knowledge, which describes a set of known concepts before
     learning;
   • SM is the set of ASP rules allowed in the hypotheses; and
   • E + and E − are sets of CDPIs called, respectively, the positive and negative examples.
A hypothesis H ⊆ SM is an inductive solution of T if and only if:
   1. ∀e ∈ E + , B ∪ H accepts e, and
   2. ∀e ∈ E − , B ∪ H does not accept e.
Example 2.2. Let T = hB, SM , hE + , E − ii be an ILASP task where:
          B = {p : - not q.} ,                                                             
                                                                     q.       q : - not p.
                                    
              hh{p} , {q}i , {r.}i ,                SM =                                    ,
                                                                 q : - p, r. q : - not p, r.
         E + = hh{q} , {p}i , {r.}i , ,
                                                      E − = hh{q} , {p}i , ∅i .
                                                           
                   hh{p} , {q}i , ∅i
                                    

A candidate hypothesis is H = {q : - not p, r.}. Now we have to check whether the positive
examples are accepted, and the negative is not:
   • For the positive examples hh{p} , {q}i , {r.}i and hh{q} , {p}i , {r.}i, the program B ∪
     H ∪ {r.} has two answer sets A1 = {p, r} and A2 = {q, r}. Then, B ∪ H ∪ {r.} accepts
     the first example because {p} ⊆ A1 and {q} ∩ A1 = ∅, and also the second one because
     {q} ⊆ A2 and {p} ∩ A2 = ∅.
   • For the positive example hh{p} , {q}i , ∅i and the negative example hh{q} , {p}i , ∅i, the
     program B ∪ H ∪ ∅ has a single answer set A01 = {p}. Then, B ∪ H ∪ ∅ accepts the
     first example since {p} ⊆ A01 and {q} ∩ A01 = ∅, and does not accept the second one
     since {q} ( A01 (also, {p} ∩ A01 6= ∅).
Therefore, H is an inductive solution of T . In contrast, H 0 = {q.} is not an inductive
solution. For instance, given the positive example hh{p} , {q}i , ∅i, the program B ∪ H 0 ∪ ∅
has a single answer set, A001 = {q}. Then, this program does not accept the example because
{p} ( A001 (also, {q} ∩ A001 6= ∅), which causes H 0 not to be an inductive solution.

                                               1037
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




3. Problem Formulation
The objectives of this work are twofold:
  1. Propose a method for learning a subgoal automaton from traces of a given reinforce-
     ment learning task (Sections 4-6).
  2. Propose a method that interleaves automaton learning and reinforcement learning
     (Section 7).
    In this section we formalize the main components of our automaton-driven RL approach,
including the class of RL tasks, the notion of traces generated by the RL agent and the
definition of subgoal automata. In later sections, we show how subgoal automata and
traces are represented in ASP (see Section 4), and how learning a subgoal automaton can
be formalized as an ILASP learning task that uses traces as examples (see Section 5).

3.1 Tasks
The class of RL tasks we consider are episodic POMDPs MΣ = hS, ST , SG , Σ, A, p, r, γ, νi
enhanced by a set of observables O. An observable is a propositional event that the agent
can sense while interacting with the environment. A labeling function L : Σ → 2O maps a
visible state into a subset of observables (or observation) O ⊆ O perceived by the agent in
that state. We emphasize that an observation solely depends on a visible state.
    We assume that the combination of a visible state and a history of observations seen
during an episode is sufficient to obtain the Markov property. Formally, the set of latent
states S is a subset of the cross product of the set of visible states Σ and a history of
observations (2O )∗ . Given this assumption, a policy over Σ × (2O )∗ could be learned;
however, this space can become very large for long histories. Throughout the paper, we
explain how the automata we propose can be seen as a compact representation of observation
histories. In addition, we also assume that the history of observations seen during an episode
is sufficient to determine whether a terminal state is reached and, if so, whether it is a goal
state.
    We use the OfficeWorld environment (Toro Icarte et al., 2018) as a running example
to explain our method. It consists of a 9×12 grid (see Figure 1) where an agent ( ) can move
in the four cardinal directions; that is, the action set is A = {up, down, left, right}. The
agent always moves in the intended direction (i.e., actions are deterministic), and remains
in the same location if it moves towards a wall. The set of visible states Σ is the set of all
locations in the grid (i.e., the agent knows the coordinate of the location it is stepping on).
The set of observables is O = {K, B, o, A, B, C, D, ∗}, all of which correspond to visible
locations. The agent picks up the coffee and the mail when it steps on locations K and B
respectively, and delivers them to the office when it steps on location o. The decorations
∗ break if the agent steps on them. There are also four locations labeled A, B, C and D.
Three tasks with different goals are defined in this environment:
   • Coffee: deliver coffee to the office.
   • CoffeeMail: deliver coffee and mail to the office.
   • VisitABCD: visit A, B, C and D in order.

                                             1038
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                              8
                              7     D         ∗          ∗        C
                              6           K
                              5
                              4     ∗         o          B        ∗
                              3
                              2                              K
                              1     A         ∗          ∗        B
                              0
                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

Figure 1: Example grid used in the OfficeWorld environment (Toro Icarte et al., 2018).



The tasks terminate when the goal is achieved or a decoration is broken (this is a dead-end
state). A reward of 1 is given when the goal is achieved, else the reward is 0.

3.2 Traces
We define the different kinds of traces that can be generated in our class of RL tasks.

Definition 3.1 (Execution trace). An execution trace λ = hσ0 , a0 , r1 , σ1 , a1 , . . . , an−1 , rn ,
σn i is a finite sequence of tuples σi = hσiΣ , σiT , σiG i, actions and rewards induced by a
(potentially changing) policy during an episode. An execution trace λ can be one of the
following:

   • A goal execution trace λG if σnG = > (i.e., a latent goal state has been reached).

   • A dead-end execution trace λD if σnT = > ∧ σnG = ⊥ (i.e., a latent dead-end state has
     been reached).

   • An incomplete execution trace λI if σnT = ⊥ (i.e., the final latent state is not terminal).

    Execution traces are the traces perceived by an RL agent. However, these are not the
traces that are used to learn the subgoal automata. Since subgoal automata aim to provide
the RL agent with a subgoal structure that is independent from the state space, they are
defined at a higher level of abstraction. Therefore, the subgoal automaton learner needs
traces of higher level events as an input. These traces are called observation traces.

Definition 3.2 (Observation trace). An observation trace λL,O is a sequence of observations
Oi ⊆ O, 0 ≤ i ≤ n, obtained by applying a labeling function L to each visible state σiΣ ∈ Σ
in an execution trace λ = hσ0 , a0 , r1 , σ1 , a1 , . . . , an−1 , rn , σn i. Formally,

                          λL,O = O0 , . . . , On | Oi = L(σiΣ ), σiΣ ∈ λ .

   For the rest of the paper, we may simply use the term trace when we refer to an
observation trace.

                                                  1039
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




    A set of execution traces is denoted by Λ = ΛG ∪ ΛD ∪ ΛI , where ΛG , ΛD and ΛI are
sets of goal, dead-end and incomplete execution traces, respectively. The associated set of
observation traces is analogously denoted by ΛL,O = ΛG        D       I
                                                      L,O ∪ ΛL,O ∪ ΛL,O .

Example 3.1. The first trace below is a goal execution trace for the OfficeWorld’s
Coffee task using the grid in Figure 1. The second trace is the resulting observation trace.

      λG = hh(4, 6), ⊥, ⊥i, ←, 0, h(3, 6), ⊥, ⊥i, ←, 0, h(3, 6), ⊥, ⊥i, →, 0, h(4, 6), ⊥, ⊥i, ↓, 0,
              h(4, 5), ⊥, ⊥i, ↓, 1, h(4, 4), >, >ii,
    λG
     L,O = h{}, {K}, {K}, {}, {}, {o}i .

The visible states in λG correspond to positions in the grid, whereas the arrows correspond
to the different actions: up (↑), down (↓), left (←) and right (→).

3.3 Subgoal Automata
Now we formally define the kind of automaton that is learned and used together with the
RL component in our approach. The edges that characterize this class of automata are
labeled by propositional logic formulas over a set of observables O. These formulas can be
interpreted as the subgoals of the task represented by the automaton. Therefore, we refer
to these automata as subgoal automata.7

Definition 3.3 (Subgoal automaton). A subgoal automaton is a tuple A = hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA ,
uR i where

   • U is a finite set of automaton states,

   • O is a finite set of observables (or alphabet),

   • δϕ : U × 2O → U is a deterministic transition function that takes an automaton state
     and a subset of observables (or observation) and returns an automaton state,

   • u0 ∈ U is the unique initial state,

   • uA ∈ U is the unique absorbing accepting state, and

   • uR ∈ U is the unique absorbing rejecting state.

    The accepting state (uA ) denotes the task’s goal achievement. In contrast, the rejecting
state (uR ) indicates that the goal can no longer be achieved. Therefore, these states are both
absorbing meaning that they do not have transitions to other states. That is, δϕ (u, O) = u
for u ∈ {uA , uR } and any observation O ⊆ O.
    To determine how the behavior of an agent during an episode is evaluated by a subgoal
automaton, we introduce the concept of automaton traversal.

Definition 3.4 (Automaton traversal). Given a subgoal automaton A and an observation
trace λL,O = hO0 , . . . , On i, an automaton traversal A(λL,O ) = hv0 , v1 , . . . , vn+1 i is a unique
sequence of automaton states such that
7. For the rest of the paper, we may simply use the term automata when we refer to subgoal automata.


                                                  1040
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




  1. v0 = u0 , and

  2. δϕ (vi , Oi ) = vi+1 for i = 0, . . . , n.

A subgoal automaton A accepts an observation trace λL,O if the automaton traversal A(λL,O ) =
hv0 , v1 , . . . , vn+1 i is such that vn+1 = uA . Analogously, A rejects λL,O if vn+1 = uR .

    Now that we know how a subgoal automaton evaluates an observation trace, we need
to determine whether this evaluation (acceptance, rejection, or neither) complies with the
type of the trace (goal, dead-end, or incomplete). The following definition introduces the
concept of validity with respect to an observation trace (i.e., whether the type of the trace
matches the automaton’s evaluation). This concept is crucial to prove the correctness of
the ASP encoding (see Section 4), as well as to learn subgoal automata (see Section 5).

Definition 3.5. Given an observation trace λ∗L,O , where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, a subgoal automaton
A is valid with respect to λ∗L,O if one of the following holds:

   • A accepts λ∗L,O and ∗ = G (i.e., λ∗L,O is a goal trace).

   • A rejects λ∗L,O and ∗ = D (i.e., λ∗L,O is a dead-end trace).

   • A does not accept nor reject λ∗L,O and ∗ = I (i.e., λ∗L,O is an incomplete trace).


    The transition function δϕ is constructed from a logical transition function ϕ that maps
state pairs into propositional formulas over O, each representing a subgoal of the task. Our
approach represents and learns logical transition functions.

Definition 3.6 (Logical transition function). A logical transition function ϕ : U × U →
DNFO is a transition function that maps a state pair into a disjunctive normal form (DNF)
formula over O, where ϕ(u, u) = ⊥ for each u ∈ U (i.e., ϕ only represents transitions to
different states).

   Expressing ϕ(u, u0 ) as a DNF formula allows representing multiple edges between the
same pair of states u and u0 . That is, each of the conjunctions inside a DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 )
labels a different edge between u and u0 . The following notation is used throughout the
paper:

   • |ϕ(u, u0 )| denotes the number of conjunctive formulas that form the formula ϕ(u, u0 ),

   • conji denotes the i-th conjunction (left-to-right) in the DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 ), and

   • O |= ϕ(u, u0 ) denotes that observation O ⊆ O satisfies the DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 ).
     Note that O is used as a truth assignment where observables in the set (i.e., o ∈ O)
     are true and observables that are not in the set (i.e., o ∈
                                                               / O) are false. Formally,

                         O |= ϕ(u, u0 ) ≡ ∃conji ∈ ϕ(u, u0 ) such that O |= conji .

                                                  1041
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                           otherwise


                                   start       u0

                              K ∧ ¬o                          ∗ ∧ ¬K
                                             K∧o

                                   o
                         u1                    uA       otherwise      uR


                                             ∗ ∧ ¬o
                     otherwise                                     otherwise

           Figure 2: Subgoal automaton for the OfficeWorld’s Coffee task.

    Given a logical transition function ϕ, the transition function δϕ can be formally defined
in terms of ϕ as follows:
                                (
                                  u0 if O |= ϕ(u, u0 )
                    δϕ (u, O) =                                          .                (1)
                                  u if @u0 ∈ U such that O |= ϕ(u, u0 )

Note that loop transitions are implicitly defined by the absence of a satisfied formula on
outgoing transitions to other states. Besides, this mapping only works if ϕ is deterministic;
that is, given a state u ∈ U and an observation O ⊆ O, at most one formula is satisfied.
Formally, there are not two states u0 , u00 ∈ U such that O |= ϕ(u, u0 ), O |= ϕ(u, u00 ), and
u0 6= u00 . Determinism is guaranteed when all pairs of outgoing transitions from a given state
to two different states are mutually exclusive; that is, an observable appears positively in
one edge and negatively in another.
Example 3.2. Figure 2 shows a minimal subgoal automaton for the OfficeWorld’s Cof-
fee task. The edges are labeled according to the logical transition function given below and
loop transitions are only taken if no outgoing transition holds.
            ϕ(u0 , u1 ) = K ∧ ¬o       ϕ(u0 , uA ) = K ∧ o       ϕ(u0 , uR ) = ∗ ∧ ¬K
            ϕ(u1 , uA ) = o            ϕ(u1 , uR ) = ∗ ∧ ¬o

For all absent pairs of states (u, u0 ), ϕ(u, u0 ) = ⊥. The automaton covers two accepting
cases: (1) K and o are observed in the same tile (i.e., direct path from u0 to uA ) and (2)
K and o are observed in different tiles (i.e., path from u0 to uA through u1 ). The transition
function is deterministic because all pairs of outgoing transitions from a given state to two
different states are mutually exclusive (e.g., the formulas o and ∗∧¬o are mutually exclusive
because o appears positively in the former and negatively in the latter). Note that, in this
case, no pairs of states have multiple edges; that is, |ϕ(u, u0 )| = 1 for all pairs of states.
Example 3.3. The automaton traversal for the observation trace λL,O = h{}, {K}, {}, {}, {o}i
in the automaton of Figure 2 is A(λL,O ) = hu0 , u0 , u1 , u1 , u1 , uA i.

                                              1042
                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




4. Representation of Subgoal Automata in Answer Set Programming
In this section we explain how subgoal automata are represented using Answer Set Program-
ming (ASP). First, we describe how traces and subgoal automata are represented. Then,
we present the general rules that describe the behavior of a subgoal automaton. Finally, we
prove the correctness of the representation.
Definition 4.1 (ASP representation of an observation trace). Given an observation trace
λL,O = hO0 , . . . , On i, M (λL,O ) denotes the set of ASP facts that describe it:

                                       {obs(o, t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n, o ∈ Ot } ∪
                           M (λL,O ) = {step(t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n} ∪
                                       {last(n).} .


    The obs(o, t) predicate indicates that observable o ∈ O is observed at step t, step(t)
states that t is a step of the trace, and last(n) indicates that the trace ends at step n.
Example 4.1. The set of ASP facts for the observation trace λL,O = h{a}, {}, {b, c}i is
M (λL,O ) = {obs(a, 0)., obs(b, 2)., obs(c, 2)., step(0), step(1)., step(2)., last(2).}.
Definition 4.2 (ASP representation of a subgoal automaton). Given a subgoal automaton
A = hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i, M (A) = MU (A) ∪ Mϕ (A) denotes the set of ASP rules that
describe it, where:
                                 MU (A) = {state (u) . | u ∈ U }
and
                                                                                              
               
               ed(u, u0 , i).                                                                 
                                                                                               
               
               ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - not obs(o , T), step(T).     u ∈   U \ {u   , u     } ,
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
               
                                               1                              A R             
                                                                                               
               
                                        .
                                         .                            0
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                         .                           u  ∈  U \ {u}     ,
               
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
               
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                      0
                ϕ̄(u, u , i, T) : - not obs(on , T), step(T).     1 ≤ i ≤ |ϕ(u, u )| ,0        
      Mϕ (A) =                                                                                   .
               
               ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - obs(on+1 , T), step(T).       conji ∈ ϕ(u, u0 ),          
                                                                                               
                                                              conji = o1 ∧ · · · ∧ on
                                                                                              
               
                                        ..                                                    
                                                                                               
                                          .
               
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                              
               
               
                                                                   ∧ ¬o  n+1 ∧  · · ·  ∧  ¬o  
                                                                                              m
                                                                                               
               ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - obs(o , T), step(T).
                                                                                              
                                                                                               
                                           m

   The rules in M (A) are described as follows:
   • Facts state(u) indicate that u is an automaton state.
   • Facts ed(u, u0 , i) indicate that there is a transition from state u to u0 using edge i.
     Note that i is the i-th conjunction in the DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 ).8
   • Normal rules whose head is of the form ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) state that the transition from
     state u to state u0 with edge i does not hold at step T. The body of these rules consists
     of a single obs(o, T) literal and an atom step(T) indicating that T is a step. Remember
     that we represent variables using upper case letters, which is the case of steps T here.
8. Remember that each conjunction in the DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 ) represents a different edge between states
   u and u0 .


                                                 1043
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Note that ϕ̄ represents the negation of the logical transition function ϕ. This is because,
as discussed in more detail later in Section 5, learning the negation of the logical transition
function ϕ makes the search space smaller and, thus, makes the learning process faster.
Example 4.2. The following rules represent the automaton in Figure 2 (p. 1042).
                                                                                                
  
  state(u0 ). state(u1 ).                            state(uA ). state(uR ).                    
                                                                                                 
  
  
  
  ed(u 0 1, u  , 1). ed(u   ,
                            0 Au , 1). ed(u ,
                                           0 Ru , 1). ed(u 1 A, u  , 1). ed(u   ,
                                                                               1 Ru , 1).        
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
  ϕ̄(u0 , u1 , 1, T) : - not obs(K, T), step(T). ϕ̄(u0 , u1 , 1, T) : - obs(o, T), step(T).
  
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
   ϕ̄(u0 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(K, T), step(T). ϕ̄(u0 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(o, T), step(T).
   ϕ̄(u0 , uR , 1, T) : - not obs(∗, T), step(T).     ϕ̄(u0 , uR , 1, T) : - obs(K, T), step(T).
  
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
  
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
   ϕ̄(u1 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(o, T), step(T).
  
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
  
                                                                                                
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                
   ϕ̄(u1 , uR , 1, T) : - not obs(∗, T), step(T).     ϕ̄(u1 , uR , 1, T) : - obs(o, T), step(T).

General Rules. In order to check whether an automaton accepts or rejects an observation
trace, it is necessary to reason about the automaton’s behavior. This is done by means of
a set of rules R that define how a subgoal automaton processes an observation trace. This
set of rules is given by the union of different components, R = Rϕ ∪ Rδ ∪ Rst . The subsets
Rϕ and Rδ define the rules related to the automaton transition function:
   • The first rule in Rϕ defines the logical transition function ϕ in terms of its negation
     ϕ̄ and ed atoms. The second rule indicates that an outgoing transition from state X
     is taken at step T.
                                                                                      
                           ϕ(X, Y, E, T) : - not ϕ̄(X, Y, E, T), ed(X, Y, E), step(T).
                   Rϕ =
                           out ϕ(X, T) : - ϕ(X, , , T).

   • The rules in Rδ define the transition function δ in terms of ϕ, as defined in Equa-
     tion 1 (p. 1042). The first rule states that X transitions to Y at step T if an outgoing
     transition to Y holds at that step. In contrast, the second rule indicates that state X
     transitions to itself at step T if no outgoing transition is satisfied at that step.
                                                                               
                              δ(X, Y, T) : - ϕ(X, Y, , T).
                     Rδ =
                              δ(X, X, T) : - not out ϕ(X, T), state(X), step(T).

    The subset Rst is used to define the automaton traversal of the trace (that is, the
sequence of visited automaton states), and the criteria for accepting or rejecting a trace.
The st(T, X) atoms indicate that a trace is in state X at step T. The first rule defines that
the agent is in u0 at step 0. The second rule determines that at step T+1 the agent will be
in state Y if it is in state X at step T and a transition between them holds at that step. The
third (resp. fourth) rule indicates that the observation trace is accepted (resp. rejected) if
the state at the trace’s last step is uA (resp. uR ).
                                                                          
                                    
                                     st(0, u0 ).                          
                                                                           
                                      st(T+1, Y) : - st(T, X), δ(X, Y, T).
                                                                          
                            Rst =
                                    
                                     accept : - last(T), st(T+1, uA ).   
                                      reject : - last(T), st(T+1, uR ).
                                                                          



                                                1044
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Proposition 4.1 (Correctness of the ASP encoding). Given a finite observation trace λ∗L,O ,
where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, and an automaton A that is valid with respect to λ∗L,O , the program
P = M (A) ∪ R ∪ M (λ∗L,O ) has a unique answer set AS and (1) accept ∈ AS if and only
if ∗ = G, and (2) reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D.

Proof. See Appendix A.

5. Learning Subgoal Automata from Traces
This section describes our approach for learning a subgoal automaton. Firstly, we formalize
the task of learning an automaton from traces.

Definition 5.1. An automaton learning task is a tuple TA = hU, O, u0 , uA , uR , ΛL,O , κi,
where

   • U ⊇ {u0 , uA , uR } is a set of automaton states, where u0 is the initial state, uA is the
     accepting state and uR is the rejecting state;

   • O is a set of observables;

   • ΛL,O = ΛG      D      I
             L,O ∪ ΛL,O ∪ ΛL,O is a set of observation traces; and

   • κ is the maximum number of directed edges (u, u0 ) from a state u ∈ U to another state
     u0 ∈ U \ {u}.

An automaton A is a solution of TA if and only if it is valid with respect to all the traces
in ΛL,O ; that is, if and only if it accepts all goal traces in ΛG
                                                                 L,O , rejects all dead-end traces
in ΛL,O , and does not accept nor reject any incomplete trace in ΛIL,O .
    D


    Note that (i) κ can be seen as the maximum number of disjuncts that a DNF formula
ϕ(u, u0 ) between two states u and u0 can have, and (ii) U will be the set of states of the
learned automaton.
    Given an automaton learning task TA , we map it into an ILASP learning task M (TA ) =
hB, SM , hE + , ∅ii and use the ILASP system (Law et al., 2015b) to find a minimal inductive
solution Mϕ (A) ⊆ SM that covers the examples.9 We define the different components of
M (TA ) below.

Background Knowledge. The background knowledge B = BU ∪ R is a set of rules that
describe the general behavior of any subgoal automaton. The set of rules BU consists of
state(u) facts for each automaton state u ∈ U , while R is the set of general rules that
defines how subgoal automata process observation traces (see the definition in Section 4).
Describing known concepts through the background knowledge is useful to avoid learning
everything from scratch. In this case, we only need to learn the edges of the automata, and
not the general definitions of how subgoal automata work (i.e., the rules in R).

9. Note that we do not use negative examples (E − = ∅).


                                                1045
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Hypothesis Space. The hypothesis space SM contains all ed and ϕ̄ rules that character-
ize a transition from a non-terminal state u ∈ U \ {uA , uR } to a different state u0 ∈ U \ {u}
using edge i ∈ [1, κ]. Formally, it is defined as
                   ed(u, u0 , i).
                                                                                    
                                                                 u ∈ U \ {uA , uR } ,
            SM = ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - obs(o, T), step(T).          u0 ∈ U \ {u} ,      .
                           0
                     ϕ̄(u, u , i, T) : - not obs(o, T), step(T). i ∈ [1, κ] , o ∈ O
                                                                                     

Loop transitions are not included since they are unsatisfiable formulas (see Definition 3.6).
Note that it is possible to learn unlabeled transitions, which are taken unconditionally (that
is, regardless of the current observation). For example, for a transition from u to u0 using
edge i, an inductive solution may only include ed(u, u0 , i) and not ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T).
     As mentioned before, the learner induces the negation ϕ̄ of a logical transition function
   10
ϕ. A different hypothesis space where the learned rules characterize ϕ directly could have
been defined. However, this requires guessing the maximum number of literals that label
a transition between two states.11 Therefore, we represent subgoal automata using ϕ̄ and
instead of imposing a maximum size for the conjunctive formulas, we impose a limit (κ) on
the number of edges from one state to another.
     It is important to realize that the learned hypothesis is denoted by Mϕ (A) and not
M (A) (see Definition 4.2). The set of automaton states is given in the background knowl-
edge B, and the hypothesis space SM only contains transition rules. Hence, the hypothesis
is a smallest subset of transition rules that covers all the examples. Since the set of automa-
ton states is provided through the background knowledge, a minimal automaton (i.e., an
automaton with the minimum number of states) is only guaranteed to be learned when the
set of automaton states is the minimal one. The mechanism that interleaves reinforcement
learning and automaton learning described in Section 7 ensures that the learned automaton
is minimal for a specific κ.
Example Sets. Given a set of traces ΛL,O = ΛG      D      I
                                            L,O ∪ ΛL,O ∪ ΛL,O , the set of positive
examples is defined as
                       E + = {he∗ , M (λL,O )i | ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, λL,O ∈ Λ∗L,O },
where
    • eG = h{accept}, {reject}i,
    • eD = h{reject}, {accept}i, and
    • eI = h{}, {accept, reject}i
are the partial interpretations for goal, dead-end and incomplete traces. The accept and
reject atoms express whether a trace is accepted or rejected by the automaton; hence,
goal traces must only be accepted, dead-end traces must only be rejected, and incomplete
traces cannot be accepted or rejected. Note that the context of each example is the set of
ASP facts M (λL,O ) that represents the corresponding trace (see Definition 4.1).
10. Remember that the set of rules R introduced in Section 4 defines ϕ in terms of ϕ̄.
11. This is because ILASP has the maximum length of learnable rules as a parameter. This is a problem to
    enforce determinism (see Section 6.1) since we do not know how many literals are going to be needed
    to make two formulas mutually exclusive. Besides, allowing for an arbitrarily large number of literals to
    overcome the problem increases the hypothesis massively.


                                                    1046
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Correctness of the Learning Task.          The following theorem captures the correctness of
the automaton learning task.

Theorem 5.1. Given an automaton learning task TA = hU, O, u0 , uA , uR , ΛL,O , κi, an au-
tomaton A is a solution of TA if and only if Mϕ (A) is an inductive solution of M (TA ) =
hB, SM , hE + , ∅ii.

Proof. Assume A is a solution of TA .
     ⇐⇒ A is valid with respect to all traces in ΛL,O (i.e., A accepts all traces in ΛG
                                                                                      L,O ,
                       D                                                I
rejects all traces in ΛL,O and does not accept nor reject any trace in ΛL,O ).
     ⇐⇒ By Proposition 4.1, for each trace λ∗L,O ∈ Λ∗L,O where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, M (A) ∪ R ∪
M (λ∗L,O ) has a unique answer set AS and (1) accept ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = G, and (2)
reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D.
     ⇐⇒ For each example e ∈ E + , R ∪ M (A) accepts e.
     ⇐⇒ For each example e ∈ E + , B ∪ Mϕ (A) accepts e (the two programs are identical).
     ⇐⇒ Mϕ (A) is an inductive solution of M (TA ).

Optimization. To make the formalization simpler, we have always included uA and uR
in the set of automaton states U of the automaton learning task TA . However, in practice,
uA is not included in U when the set of goal traces ΛG L,O is empty. Likewise, uR is not
                                               D
included in U when the set of dead-end traces ΛL,O is empty. Removing these states when
they are not needed is helpful to make the hypothesis space smaller.

6. Verification of Structural Properties
The formalization of the automaton learning task described in Section 5 induces non-
deterministic automata. That is, there can exist an observation that simultaneously satisfies
two formulas labeling outgoing edges to two different states. In order to comply with the
definition of the logical transition function (see Definition 3.6, p. 1041), we need to constrain
it to be deterministic. The automaton states act as a proxy for determining what is the
current level of completion of the task; in other words, which subgoals have been achieved.
If the automaton is non-deterministic, several different levels of completion can be active
simultaneously, which is impractical from the perspective of an RL agent. These agents
need to know exactly in which stage they are in order to make an appropriate decision.
    Determinism is not the only property we can impose. Note that an automaton can
be easily transformed into an equivalent one by rearranging its state and edge identifiers.
Therefore, ILASP can visit multiple symmetric automata during the search for a solution
that covers the examples. By avoiding revisiting parts of the search space, the automaton
learning time can be greatly reduced.
    In this section we introduce rules that allow us to verify that a given automaton is deter-
ministic and complies with specific properties that characterize a canonical representation
(e.g., a criteria for naming the automaton states). Crucially, these verification rules can
also be used to enforce these properties during search.
    Both the determinism and symmetry properties are related to the automaton structure;
that is, the edges and formulas that label them. The ASP representation M (A) of a
subgoal automaton A given in Definition 4.2 represents the formulas on the edges as rules.

                                              1047
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Consequently, we cannot impose constraints over them easily. To solve this problem, we
map the ϕ̄ rules in M (A) to facts of the form pos(u, u0 , i, o) and neg(u, u0 , i, o). These facts
express that observable o ∈ O appears positively (resp. negatively) in the edge i from state
u to state u0 . Formally, given the ASP encoding M (A) of automaton A, its corresponding
mapping into facts F (M (A)) is defined as follows:
                                                                                                   
                       state(u).                state(u).                                          
                               0 , i).                     0 , i).
                                                                                                   
                        ed(u, u                  ed(u,  u
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                                  0                     0
                                                                                                   
                        pos(u, u    ,  i, o   ). ϕ̄(u, u  ,  i, T) : - not   obs(o   , T), step(T).
                                                                                                   
                                            1                                      1
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                     
                     
                                   .
                                    ..                                     .
                                                                           ..
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
        F (M (A)) =                                                                                   .
                     
                       pos(u, u0 , i, on ).     ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - not obs(on , T), step(T).    
                        neg(u, u0 , i, on+1 ). ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, T) : - obs(on+1 , T), step(T). 
                     
                                                                                                   
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                     
                                    .
                                     .                                      .
                                                                            .
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                     .                                      .
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                 0
                        neg(u, u , i, om ).             0
                                                 ϕ̄(u, u , i, T) : - obs(om , T), step(T).
                                                                                                    

Note that the right hand side of the set corresponds to a given M (A). The facts state and
ed are replicated, while the rules ϕ̄ are transformed into pos and neg facts.12 Given this
factual representation of a subgoal automaton, we can now define constraints for enforcing
determinism and a canonical structure over these facts.

Example 6.1. The set of facts below represents the formulas on the edges of the automaton
in Figure 2 (p. 1042) generated from the logical transition function in Example 4.2 (p. 1044).
                                                                     
                         
                           pos(u0 , u1 , 1, K). neg(u0 , u1 , 1, o). 
                                                                      
                         pos(u0 , uA , 1, K). pos(u0 , uA , 1, o). 
                         
                                                                     
                                                                      
                            pos(u0 , uR , 1, ∗). neg(u0 , uR , 1, K).
                            pos(u1 , uA , 1, o).
                         
                                                                     
                                                                      
                         
                                                                     
                                                                      
                            pos(u1 , uR , 1, ∗). neg(u1 , uR , 1, o).
                                                                     

    Verifying that a learned automaton complies with a set of structural properties can be
done over its factual encoding. That is, those automata that violate the properties are
discarded as solutions to the automaton learning task. However, this is clearly computa-
tionally expensive. ILASP allows the above mapping to be included in the learning task
through meta-program injection (Law et al., 2018). This enables the learner to verify the
properties during the search for an automaton, which effectively shrinks the search space
and speeds up automaton learning.
    In what follows, we use the factual representation above to encode the determinism
constraints (Section 6.1) and a canonical structure for breaking symmetries (Section 6.2).

6.1 Determinism
As described in Section 3.3, a logical transition function is deterministic if no observation can
satisfy two outgoing formulas to two different states simultaneously. As these formulas are
12. Note that we could have learned the factual representation F (M (A)) instead of the one based on normal
    rules M (A). We opted for the latter since it requires less grounding and can be potentially used to
    represent more complex automata in future work (see Section 10).


                                                   1048
                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




conjunctions of literals, two formulas are mutually exclusive (i.e., cannot be both satisfied
at the same time) if and only if an observable appears positively in the first formula and
negatively in the second (or vice versa). The set of rules below encodes this definition by
means of the mutex(X, Y, EY, Z, EZ) predicate which indicates that the formula on the edge
from X to Y with index EY is mutually exclusive with the edge X to Z with index EZ. The first
and second rules specify that two outgoing edges from state X to two different states (Y and
Z) are mutually exclusive if an observable O appears positively in one edge and negatively
in the other.13 The third rule enforces edges from a state X to two different states Y and Z
to be mutually exclusive.
                                                                                   
                mutex(X, Y, EY, Z, EZ) : - pos(X, Y, EY, O), neg(X, Z, EZ, O), Y<Z.
                 mutex(X, Y, EY, Z, EZ) : - neg(X, Y, EY, O), pos(X, Z, EZ, O), Y<Z.
                 : - not mutex(X, Y, EY, Z, EZ), ed(X, Y, EY), ed(X, Z, EZ), Y<Z.
                                                                                   


6.2 Symmetry Breaking
In this section we describe rules which aim to enforce that the induced automata follow a
canonical structure in order to make the search for solution faster by breaking symmetries.
    There are several types of symmetries we are interested in breaking. Firstly, any two
states except for u0 , uA and uR are interchangeable. For example, Figure 3 shows two
automata whose states u1 , u2 and u3 can be used interchangeably. Secondly, there can
also be symmetries in the automaton edges. The inductive solution to the automaton
learning task M (TA ) contains transition rules whose edge indices range between 1 and
κ (the maximum number of edges from one state to another). For instance, if κ = 2
a potentially learned representation of the Coffee automaton (see Figure 2, p. 1042) is
shown below. Note that edges can arbitrarily be labeled 1 or 2 even though there is a single
edge between every pair of states.
                                                                                                     
  
  ed(u0 , u1 , 2). ed(u0 , uA , 1). ed(u0 , uR , 2).   ed(u1 , uA , 1). ed(u1 , uR , 2).             
                                                                                                      
  
  
  
  ϕ̄(u0 , u1 , 2, T) : - not obs(K, T), step(T).       ϕ̄(u0 , u1 , 2, T) : - obs(o, T), step(T).    
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
   ϕ̄(u0 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(K, T), step(T).       ϕ̄(u0 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(o, T), step(T).
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                        .
  
  ϕ̄(u0 , uR , 2, T) : - not obs(∗, T), step(T).       ϕ̄(u0 , uR , 2, T) : - obs(K, T), step(T).   
   ϕ̄(u1 , uA , 1, T) : - not obs(o, T), step(T).
  
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                      
  
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                      
   ϕ̄(u1 , uR , 2, T) : - not obs(∗, T), step(T).       ϕ̄(u1 , uR , 2, T) : - obs(o, T), step(T).
                                                                                                     


Finally, the indices of two edges between the same pair of states can be also interchanged.
    The idea of our symmetry breaking mechanism is to impose a unique assignment of
state and edge indices given a labeling of the automaton edges. In Section 6.2.1 we propose
a symmetry breaking mechanism for a particular class of labeled directed graphs, whereas
in Section 6.2.2 we explain how this method applies to subgoal automata, which can be
represented as graphs in this class.

13. The comparison Y<Z is done instead of Y!=Z for efficiency purposes. Note that both comparisons are
    equivalent in this context. The former imposes a lexicographical order to evaluate the rules and thus
    avoids reevaluating the expression when Y and Z are interchanged.


                                                   1049
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                                         start       u0
  start       u0     A ∧ ¬∗       u1
                                               K ∧ ¬B                               ¬K ∧ B

              ∗          ∗                                             K∧B∧o
                                B ∧ ¬∗


                                               u1        B∧o        uA        K∧o         u2
              uR         ∗        u2
                                                         K ∧ B ∧ ¬o

                         ∗      C ∧ ¬∗                                 o
                                                B ∧ ¬o                              K ∧ ¬o

              uA     D ∧ ¬∗       u3                                 u3

             (a) VisitABCD                                    (b) CoffeeMail

Figure 3: Minimal subgoal automata for two OfficeWorld tasks. Self-loops and transi-
          tions to the rejecting state uR in (b) are omitted for simplicity. The shaded states
          can be interchanged in the absence of symmetry breaking.



6.2.1 Graph Indexing
In this section we propose a symmetry breaking mechanism for a particular class of labeled
directed graphs.
    Let L = {l1 , . . . , lk } be a set of labels, and let G = (V, E) be a labeled directed graph
with a set of nodes V = {v1 , . . . , vn } and a set of edges E. Each edge in E is of the form
(u, v, L), where u, v ∈ V are the two connected nodes, and L ⊆ L is a subset of labels. For
each node u ∈ V , let E o (u) = {(v, w, L) ∈ E | u = v} be the set of outgoing labeled edges
from u, and let E i (u) = {(v, w, L) ∈ E | u = w} be the set of incoming labeled edges.
    We define a class G of labeled directed graphs by imposing three assumptions:

Assumption 1. The node v1 is a designated start node.

Assumption 2. Each node u ∈ V \ {v1 } is reachable on a directed path from v1 .

Assumption 3. Outgoing label sets from each node are unique, i.e. for each u ∈ V and
label set L ⊆ L there is at most one edge (u, v, L) ∈ E o (u).

   As a consequence of Assumption 2, it holds that |E i (u)| ≥ 1 for each u ∈ V \ {v1 }.

Example 6.2. The following figure is a labeled directed graph G = hV, Ei that belongs to
class G, where V = {v1 , . . . , v5 }. The set of labels is L = {a, b, c, d, e, f }.

                                              1050
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                                                  v5
                                  {a, f }                      {b}
                                                                          {c}
                                                {a, b}
                     start          v1                               v3         v2

                                                                          {d}
                                    {b, e}                     {a}
                                                  v4


Label Set Ordering.          Given a set of labels L = {l1 , . . . , lk }, we impose a total order on
label sets as follows.
Definition 6.1. A label set L ⊆ L is lower than a label set L0 ⊆ L, denoted L < L0 , if there
exists a label l1≤m≤k ∈ L such that
        / L and lm ∈ L0 , and
  1. lm ∈

                                                               / L0 .
  2. there is not a label lm0 |m0 <m such that lm0 ∈ L and lm0 ∈

     A label set L ⊆ L can be mapped into a binary string B(L) = {0, 1}k where Bm (L) = 1
if lm ∈ L and 0 otherwise. Note that Bm (L) denotes the m-th digit in B(L). Then, a label
set L is lower than another label set L0 if its binary representation B(L) is lexicographically
lower than B(L0 ).
Example 6.3. Given the label set L = {a, b, c, d, e, f }, the following inequalities between
some of its subsets hold. Note that the second column contains the corresponding binary
representations of the sets.
                            {}       < {a, d, f }        (000000 < 100101),
                           {d}       <   {c}             (000100 < 001000),
                          {b, e}     < {a, f }           (010010 < 100001),
                          {a, f }    < {a, b}            (100001 < 110000).


Graph Indexing. Given a graph G ∈ G, we next introduce a graph indexing that assigns
unique integers to each node in V and, for each node u ∈ V , to each outgoing edge in E o (u).
Formally, a graph indexing is a tuple I(G) = hf, {Γu }u∈V i of bijections defined as

                              f : V → {1, . . . , |V |} s.t. f (v1 ) = 1,
                             Γu : E o (u) → {1, . . . , |E o (u)|}, ∀u ∈ V.

Hence a graph indexing always assigns 1 to the designated start node v1 . Since outgoing
label sets are unique due to Assumption 3, we use Γu (L) as shorthand for Γu (u, v, L).
    Given a graph indexing I(G), we introduce an associated parent function ΠI : V \{v1 } →
{1, . . . , |V |} × N from nodes (excluding the start node v1 ) to pairs of integers, defined as

                                ΠI (v) =         min       (f (u), Γu (L)).
                                             (u,v,L)∈E i (v)


                                                    1051
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Here, the minimum is with respect to a lexicographical ordering of integer pairs. Hence
ΠI (v) = (i, e) is the smallest integer i assigned to any node on an incoming edge to v and,
in the case of ties, the smallest integer e on such an edge. Note that the parent function is
well-defined since |E i (v)| ≥ 1 for each v ∈ V \ {v1 } due to the reachability assumption.
    We are particularly interested in the graph indexing that corresponds to a breadth-first
search (BFS) traversal of the graph G, which we proceed to define.
Definition 6.2. A graph indexing I(G) is a BFS traversal if the following conditions hold:
  1. For each pair of nodes u and v in V \ {v1 }, ΠI (u) < ΠI (v) ⇔ f (u) < f (v).

  2. For each node u ∈ V and each pair of outgoing edges (u, v, L) and (u, v 0 , L0 ) in E o (u),
     L < L0 ⇔ Γu (L) < Γu (L0 ).
    Due to the second condition in Definition 6.2, the bijection Γu of each node u ∈ V
clearly orders outgoing edges by their label sets. Due to the first condition, the bijection f
orders node u before node v if the parent function of u is smaller than that of v. In a BFS
traversal from v1 , nodes are processed in the order they are first visited. In this context,
the parent function identifies the edge used to visit a node for the first time. Together,
these facts imply that f assigns integers to nodes in the order they are visited by a BFS
traversal from v1 , given that the label set ordering is used to break ties among edges. This
BFS traversal can be characterized by a BFS subtree whose edges are defined by the parent
function.
Example 6.4. The figure below shows a graph indexing for the graph in Example 6.2, with
nodes and edges labeled by their assigned integer. This graph indexing is a BFS traversal
since nodes are ordered according to their distance from the start node v1 , and since the edge
integers used to break ties are consistent with the label set ordering shown in Example 6.3.
The parent function is given by ΠI (v2 ) = (4, 1), ΠI (v3 ) = (1, 3), ΠI (v4 ) = (1, 1), and
ΠI (v5 ) = (1, 2), and the corresponding BFS subtree appears in bold.

                                           3 : v5
                            2 : {a, f }                1 : {b}
                                                                  2 : {c}
                                          3 : {a, b}
                    start     1 : v1                     4 : v3             5 : v2

                                                                  1 : {d}
                             1 : {b, e}                1 : {a}
                                           2 : v4



    The important property that we exploit about BFS traversals is that they are unique,
which we prove in Lemma 6.1. To prove it, we use the result in Proposition 6.1 when BFS
is applied to any kind of directed graph where all nodes are reachable.
Proposition 6.1. If BFS visits the neighbors of each node in a fixed order, the resulting
tree is unique.

                                               1052
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Proof. By contradiction. Assume that two different BFS trees, T and T 0 , are produced
using the same visitation criteria. Then T contains an edge (u, v) that is not in T 0 , and T 0
contains an edge (u0 , v) that is not in T . In the case of T , this means that u was visited
before u0 . Analogously, u0 was visited before u to produce T 0 . Therefore, the visitation
criteria is different for each of the BFS trees. This is a contradiction.

Lemma 6.1. Each graph G ∈ G has a unique associated BFS traversal I(G).

Proof. Intuitively, the lemma holds because there is only one way to perform a BFS traversal
from v1 , given that we use the label set ordering to break ties among edges.
    Formally, for each u ∈ V , since outgoing label sets are unique, there is a unique bijection
Γu that satisfies the second condition in Definition 6.2. If Γu orders outgoing edges in any
other way, there will always be two outgoing edges (u, v, L) and (u, v 0 , L0 ) in E o (u) such
that L < L0 and Γu (L) > Γu (L0 ), thus violating the condition.
    Then, if we fix the correct definition of Γu for each u ∈ V , there is a unique bijection f
that satisfies the first condition in Definition 6.2. To recover this bijection we can simply
perform a BFS traversal from v1 , using the bijections Γu , u ∈ V , to break ties among
edges. By Proposition 6.1, this results in a unique BFS tree. If f orders nodes in any other
way, there will always be two nodes u and v in V \ {v1 } such that ΠI (u) < ΠI (v) and
f (u) > f (v), thus violating the condition.

    Appendix B.1 shows an encoding of our symmetry breaking mechanism in the form of
a satisfiability (SAT) formula and formally prove several of its properties.

6.2.2 Application to Subgoal Automata
In this section we devise a symmetry breaking mechanism based on the graph indexing from
the previous subsection. The key idea is to encode rules that force ILASP to generate a
graph indexing which is also a BFS traversal. Since this graph indexing is unique due to
Lemma 6.1, ILASP can only represent each graph in one way, precluding multiple symmetric
variations. In fact, we could have used any unique graph indexing for this purpose.
    We first show that a subgoal automaton A = hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i is a special case of a
label directed graph G = hV, Ei in the class G. The set of automaton states U corresponds
to the set of nodes V , while the logical transition function ϕ corresponds to the set of edges
E. Crucially, a subgoal automaton complies with all three assumptions we made about
graphs in the class G:

   • Assumption 1 holds because A has an initial state u0 .

   • Assumption 2 is enforced by the set of rules below. The first rule defines u0 to be
     reachable, while the second rule indicates that a state is reachable if it has an incoming
     edge from a reachable state. Finally, the third rule enforces all states to be reachable.
                                                                     
                           reachable(u0 ).                           
                            reachable(Y) : - reachable(X), ed(X, Y, ).
                             : - not reachable(X), state(X).
                                                                     


                                             1053
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




   • Assumption 3 holds because the automaton is deterministic (see Section 6.1). If the
     automaton is deterministic, the formulas labeling two outgoing edges from a given
     state to two different states are mutually exclusive and, thus, are different (which
     fulfills the assumption). Besides, two outgoing edges from a given state to another
     state cannot be equal because the automaton learner, ILASP, induces a minimal
     hypothesis (in our case, a minimal set of transition rules). Since a hypothesis with
     two equally labeled edges is not minimal, the assumption still holds.

    Even though a subgoal automaton complies with the three assumptions of labeled di-
rected graphs, there are two differences between them:

  1. The edges of a subgoal automaton are labeled by propositional formulas over a set of
     observables O, whereas the edges of a labeled directed graph are defined over a set of
     labels L.

  2. The edge indices in an indexed labeled directed graph are different from those in our
     representation of a subgoal automaton. In the former, the edge indices from a given
     node range between 1 to the number of outgoing edges from than node. In contrast,
     the indices range from 1 to the number of edges between each pair of states. In other
     words, the edge indices from a given node in the labeled directed graph are unique,
     whereas in a subgoal automaton they can be repeated.

To address these differences we just need to set a mapping from the representation used by
the subgoal automata to that characterizing a labeled directed graph. The set of symmetry
breaking constraints is defined on top of this mapping. Appendix B.2 shows two possible
ways of encoding the symmetry breaking mechanism in ASP using the factual representation
introduced at the beginning of this section.

7. Interleaved Automaton Learning
In this section we describe ISA (Induction of Subgoal Automata for Reinforcement Learn-
ing), a method that combines reinforcement learning and automaton learning. Firstly, we
explain two reinforcement learning algorithms that we use to exploit a given subgoal au-
tomaton (Section 7.1). Secondly, we explain how reinforcement learning and automaton
learning are interleaved to learn a minimal automaton (Section 7.2). The automaton learn-
ing process includes the constraints introduced in Section 6 for enforcing determinism while
the symmetry breaking constraints are optional (i.e., we can still learn a usable deterministic
subgoal automaton without the latter).

7.1 Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
In this section we describe two methods to learn a policy for an episodic POMDP MΣ =
hS, ST , SG , Σ, A, p, r, γ, νi by exploiting the automaton structure given by its subgoals. Each
method is characterized by a different way of using options (Sutton et al., 1999):

  1. Learning an option for each outgoing edge in the automaton and a metacontroller to
     choose between options in each automaton state (Section 7.1.1).

                                              1054
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




   2. Learning an option for each automaton state (Section 7.1.2).
    In general, a subgoal automaton is used as follows. Firstly, the agent selects an option
when it reaches an automaton state. Note that in (1) there can be multiple options to
choose from, whereas in (2) there is a single option. Once an option is chosen, the agent
selects actions according to that option’s policy until its termination. An option terminates
when either (a) the episode ends, or (b) when a formula on an outgoing edge from the
current automaton state is satisfied. After the agent experiences a tuple hσt , at , σt+1 i in
automaton state u at step t, it transitions to the automaton state u0 = δϕ (u, L(σt+1
                                                                                   Σ )) given

by the transition function of the automaton. Remember that the labeling function L maps
a visible state into an observation.
    The automaton is used as an external memory since each automaton state indicates
which subgoals have been achieved so far. Crucially, the use of the automaton as an external
memory causes tasks to have the Markov property given two assumptions made earlier (see
Section 3.1). First, that observations only depend on visible states. Second, that the
combination of a visible state and a history of observables (i.e., a sequence of achieved
subgoals) is sufficient to be Markovian. Because each option is only executed for a specific
history of observations (represented by the current automaton state), we can define an
option’s policy over visible states only.
    In the following sections we describe the features of the RL methods in detail including:
    • how options are modeled,
    • how policies are learned, and
    • which optimality guarantees they have.

7.1.1 Learning an Option for each Outgoing Edge and a Metacontroller
      for each Automaton State (HRL)
The edges of a subgoal automaton are labeled by propositional formulas over a set of
observables O. The idea is that each of these formulas represents a subgoal of the task
encoded by the automaton. Therefore, an intuitive approach to exploit the automaton
structure consists in learning an option that aims to reach a state whose observation satisfies
a given formula, and a metacontroller that learns which option to take at each automaton
state. Since decisions are taken at two different hierarchical levels, we will refer to this
approach as HRL (Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning).
Option Modeling. Given a subgoal automaton A = hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i, the set of
options in a non-terminal automaton state u ∈ U (that is, a state with outgoing transitions
to other states) is
                            Ωu = ωu,φ | φ ∈ ϕ(u, u0 ), u 6= u0 ,
                                

where ωu,φ is the option that attempts to satisfy the formula φ in state u ∈ U . Note that
φ is a disjunct of the DNF formula ϕ(u, u0 ).14 Each option at the automaton state u is a
tuple ωu,φ = hIu , πφ , βu i where:
14. Remember that the logical transition function ϕ : U × U → DNFO maps an automaton state pair into
    a DNF formula over O.


                                               1055
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




    • The initiation set is simply the set of visible states (formally, Iu = Σ) since when the
      automaton state u is reached, it does not matter which is the current visible state
      σ Σ ∈ Σ: an option in that automaton state will be started.
    • The policy πφ : Σ → A maps a visible state to a primitive action with the goal of
      satisfying the propositional formula φ.
    • The termination condition βu : Σ × {⊥, >} × {⊥, >} → [0, 1] indicates that the option
      terminates if any formula on an outgoing edge from u holds (i.e., the formula does
      not necessarily have to be φ) or a terminal state is reached:
                         (
                           1 if ∃u0 ∈ U such that L(σ Σ ) |= ϕ(u, u0 ) or σ T = >
                βu (σ) =                                                          .
                           0 otherwise

Note that the policy πφ can be shared by different options in the automaton. This oppor-
tunity arises when two different automaton states have outgoing edges labeled by the same
formula φ. Indeed, we store a dictionary that maps a formula φ into its Q-function and use
it for the different options that depend on φ.
    In the case of terminal states (e.g., uA and uR ), the set of available options Ωu at
automaton state u ∈ U is formed by one-step options, each corresponding to a primitive
action a ∈ A. Their initiation sets are the same as for non-terminal automaton states.
Policy Learning. In this approach, decisions are taken at two levels and, thus, two types
of policies are learned: (1) policies over options (i.e., a metacontroller) and (2) option
policies.
    A policy over options Πu : Σ → Ωu in state u ∈ U maps a visible state into an option
available at u. These policies are learned using SMDP Q-learning (Bradtke & Duff, 1994)
with -greedy exploration. Given an experience tuple hσt , ωt , σt+k i, where ωt ∈ Ωu is an
option taken in automaton state u at step t, the update rule is the following:
                                                                                    
               Σ               Σ                 k          Σ      0         Σ
          Qu (σt , ωt ) = Qu (σt , ωt ) + α r + γ max
                                                   0
                                                      Qu0 (σt+k , ω ) − Qu (σt , ωt ) ,
                                                      ω ∈Ωu0

where k is the number of steps between σt and σt+k , r is the cumulative discounted reward
over this time, and u0 is the automaton state when the option ends. Note that the discounted
term depends on u0 (i.e., the policy in u depends on that in u0 ) and becomes 0 when σt+k    T

is true (i.e., the latent state is terminal) since there is no applicable action thereafter.
    An option policy πφ : Σ → A aiming to satisfy a formula φ is not learned using the
rewards from the POMDP. Instead, we use a pseudoreward function rφ : Σ × {⊥, >} ×
{⊥, >} → R, which is defined as follows:
                                     
                                                       Σ
                                     rsuccess if L(σ ) |= φ
                                     
                            rφ (σ) = rdeadend if σ T = > ∧ σ G = ⊥ ,
                                     
                                       rstep     otherwise
                                     

where rsuccess > 0 is given when the next state satisfies φ, rdeadend ≤ 0 is given if the next
state is a dead-end state, and rstep ≤ 0 is given after every step otherwise.15 Note that the
15. In Section 8 we instantiate rφ in two different ways and show the impact they have on learning.


                                                  1056
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




last case includes the scenario in which a formula different from φ labeling an edge from the
current automaton state is satisfied. These policies are learned using Q-learning (Watkins,
1989) with -greedy exploration. The update rule for a given formula φ and an experience
tuple hσt , at , σt+1 i is:
                                                                                          
                Σ            Σ                                    Σ      0         Σ
        Qφ (σt , at ) = Qφ (σt , at ) + α rφ (σt+1 ) + γ max
                                                          0
                                                             Qφ (σt+1 , a ) − Qφ (σt , at ) , (2)
                                                        a

where the second term of the target becomes 0 when either a terminal state is reached (i.e.,
  T
σt+1                                                          Σ ) |= φ).
       is true) or the next observation satisfies φ (i.e., L(σt+1
     Intra-option learning is easily applicable to update an option policy πφ0 while another
policy πφ is being followed. That is, given an option policy πφ , an experience tuple
hσt , at , σt+1 i generated by this policy is used to update the Q-value of (σtΣ , at ) of another
formula φ0 through Equation 2.
Optimality. Since the sets of available options Ωu in non-terminal states u ∈ U do not
include any primitive actions as one-step options, then optimal policies over the set of
available options are in general suboptimal policies of the core MDP (Dietterich, 2000;
Barto & Mahadevan, 2003).

7.1.2 Learning an Option for each Automaton State (QRM)
Instead of learning one option for each outgoing edge and a metacontroller for each au-
tomaton state, we can learn a single policy over the space Σ × U . This policy is distributed
among automaton states; specifically, we learn a single option for each automaton state.
However, despite of this distribution, the global policy is still coupled everywhere since we
bootstrap the action-value from one automaton state to the next (details below). Therefore,
the policy of each single option in the automaton chooses the action that appears globally
best. In contrast, the previous method (HRL) decouples the option policies by making them
independent of one another (i.e., each attempts to satisfy a specific formula).
    The method we describe here is better known as Q-learning for Reward Machines (QRM,
Toro Icarte et al., 2018). QRM was created to exploit the structure of Reward Machines
(RMs), a family of automata similar to our subgoal automata. The main difference is
that each transition in a RM is not only labeled by a propositional formula over a set of
observables, but also by a reward function. An in-depth comparison is made in Section 9.1.
We explain QRM in terms of options for a better comparison with the method we presented
in the previous section.
Option Modeling. Given a subgoal automaton A = hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i, each state
u ∈ U encapsulates an option ωu = hIu , πu , βu i where:

   • The initiation set Iu and the termination βu are defined as in Section 7.1.1 for non-
     terminal automaton states.

   • The policy πu : Σ → A selects the action that appears globally best at a given state
     (i.e., the action that leads to the fastest achievement of the task’s goal). In other
     words, the policy does not attempt to satisfy a particular formula: it will eventually
     satisfy the formula that appears to be the best to reach the task’s goal. Therefore,

                                              1057
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




       the agent may act towards reaching different formulas for different regions of the state
       space.
Policy Learning. Given an experience tuple hσt , at , σt+1 i, the policy of an option ωu is
learned through Q-learning updates of the form:
                                                                                         
             Σ               Σ                  0                Σ      0         Σ
        Qu (σt , at ) = Qu (σt , at ) + α r(u, u ) + γ max
                                                        0
                                                           Qu0 (σt+1 , a ) − Qu (σt , at ) , (3)
                                                             a

where the discounted term depends on the next automaton state u0 (i.e., the policy in
the automaton state u is coupled with that of u0 ) and becomes 0 when the next state is
                 T
terminal (i.e., σt+1 is true) since there is no applicable action thereafter. Crucially, the
reward r used in the update does not come from the POMDP. As said before, QRM is
originally applied on automata whose transitions are also labeled by reward functions. The
reward r is obtained by evaluating those functions. Since subgoal automata are not labeled
with reward functions, we assume that the reward function r : S × A × S → R of the
underlying POMDP is as follows:16
                                                (
                                                 1 if s0 ∈ SG
                                 r(s, a, s0 ) =               .
                                                 0 otherwise

Then, given the current automaton state u ∈ U and the next automaton state u0 ∈ U the
reward r in Equation 3 is always 0 except when we transition to the accepting state:
                                       (
                                  0     1 if u 6= uA , u0 = uA
                            r(u, u ) =                         .
                                        0 otherwise

    QRM performs the update in Equation 3 for all the options given a single hσt , at , σt+1 i
experience. That is, given the option ωu of automaton state u ∈ U , the next automaton
state u0 ∈ U used for bootstrapping is determined by evaluating the observation L(σt+1   Σ )

of the next visible state in u. Note this is a form of intra-option learning: we update the
policies of all options from the experience generated by a single option’s policy.
Optimality. Toro Icarte et al. (2018) proved that in the tabular case QRM is guaranteed
to converge to an optimal policy in the limit. Essentially, optimality is possible since action-
values are bootstrapped from one automaton state to the next.
Reward Shaping. A subgoal automaton does not only provide the subgoals of a given
task, but also gives an intuition of how far the agent is from achieving the task goal.
Intuitively, the closer the agent is to the accepting state, the closer it is to the task goal.
Therefore, we can provide the agent with an extra positive reward signal when it gets closer
to the accepting state. The idea of giving additional rewards to the agent to guide its
behavior is known as reward shaping.
    Ng et al. (1999) proposed a function that provides the agent with additional reward
while guaranteeing that optimal policies remain unchanged:

                                  F (st , at , st+1 ) = γΦ(st+1 ) − Φ(st ),
16. This reward function is chosen because all evaluation tasks in Section 8 are characterized by it.


                                                    1058
                 Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




where γ is the MDP’s discount factor and Φ : S → R is a real-valued function. The
automaton structure can be exploited by defining F : (U \ {uA , uR }) × U → R in terms of
the automaton states instead (Camacho et al., 2019; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2020):

                                        F (u, u0 ) = γΦ(u0 ) − Φ(u),

where Φ : U → R. Consequently, Equation 3 is rewritten as:
                                                                                               
       Σ               Σ                  0           0                Σ      0         Σ
  Qu (σt , at ) = Qu (σt , at ) + α r(u, u ) + F (u, u ) + γ max
                                                              0
                                                                 Qu0 (σt+1 , a ) − Qu (σt , at ) .
                                                                     a

Since we want the value of F (u, u0 ) to be positive when the agent gets closer to the accepting
state uA , we define Φ as
                                     Φ(u) = |U | − d(u, uA ),
where |U | is the number of automaton states, and d(u, uA ) is a measure of distance between
u and uA . If uA is unreachable from u, then d(u, uA ) = ∞.17 Note that |U | acts as an upper
bound of the maximum length (i.e., number of directed edges) of an acyclic path between
u and uA . The distance between u and uA can be given either by the length of the shortest
path between them (dmin ) or by the length of the longest acyclic path between them (dmax ).

Example 7.1. The following figures show the additional rewards generated by the reward
shaping function using dmin (left) and dmax (right) with γ = 0.99 in the Coffee task’s
automaton (see Figure 2, p. 1042). The numbers inside the states correspond to the values
returned by Φ, whereas the numbers on the edges are the values returned by F . Note that
|U | = 4 and that the only difference in the Φ values occurs in the initial state.

                       −0.03                                                     −0.02


            start       3.0                                              start    2.0

        −0.03                         −∞                           +0.97                 −∞
                       +0.96                                                     +1.96

            +0.96                                                        +0.96
  3.0                   4.0                   −∞             3.0                  4.0         −∞

                        −∞                                                       −∞
 −0.03                                                      −0.03


7.2 Interleaved Automaton Learning Algorithm
In this section we describe how the ISA algorithm interleaves reinforcement learning and
automaton learning. Given an episodic POMDP MΣ = hS, ST , SG , Σ, A, p, r, γ, νi, a set
of observables O, a labeling function L : Σ → 2O , and a maximum number of edges κ
17. In practice, we use a sufficiently big number to represent ∞ (e.g., 106 ).


                                                     1059
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




between two states, ISA aims to learn and iteratively refine a subgoal automaton A =
hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i from the experience of a reinforcement learning agent. The subgoal
automaton A is the automaton with the smallest number of states that has at most κ edges
from one state to another and is valid with respect to all the traces observed by the agent.



Algorithm 1 ISA Algorithm
Input: An initial state (u0 ), an accepting state (uA ), a rejecting state (uR ), a set of ob-
    servables O, a labeling function L, and max. number of edges between two states (κ).
 1: U ← {u0 , uA , uR }
 2: A ← hU, O, δϕ , u0 , uA , uR i
 3: ΛL,O ← {}                                                      . Set of counterexamples
 4: InitQFunctions(A)
 5: for l = 0 to num episodes do
 6:     σ Σ , σ T , σ G ← Env.InitialState()
 7:     u ← δϕ (u0 , L(σ Σ ))
 8:     λL,O ← hL(σ Σ )i                                                    . Initialize trace
 9:     if IsCounterexample(σ T , σ G , u) then
10:          OnCounterexampleFound(λL,O )
11:          u ← δϕ (u0 , L(σ Σ ))
12:    t←0
13:    while t < max episode length ∧ σ T = ⊥ do                                . Run episode
14:        a ← SelectAction(σ Σ , u)
15:        σ 0Σ , σ 0T , σ 0G , r ← Env.Step(a)
16:        u0 ← δϕ (u, L(σ 0Σ ))
17:        UpdateTrace(λL,O , L(σ 0Σ ))
18:        if IsCounterexample(σ 0T , σ 0G , u0 ) then
19:             OnCounterexampleFound(λL,O )
20:             break
21:        else
22:             UpdateQFunctions(σ Σ , a, σ 0Σ , σ 0T , σ 0G , L(σ 0Σ ), r)
23:        σ Σ ← σ 0Σ ; σ T ← σ 0T ; u ← u0
24:        t←t+1
25: function IsCounterexample(σ T , σ G , u)
26:    return (σ G = > ∧ u 6= uA ) ∨ (σ T = > ∧ σ G = ⊥ ∧ u 6= uR ) ∨ (σ T = ⊥ ∧ u ∈ {uA , uR })
27: function OnCounterexampleFound(λL,O )
28:    ΛL,O ← ΛL,O ∪ {λL,O }
29:    is unsat ← true
30:    while is unsat do
31:        A, is unsat ← LearnAutomaton(U, u0 , uA , uR , ΛL,O , κ)
32:        if is unsat then
33:             U ← U ∪ {u|U |−2 }
34:    ResetQFunctions(A)


                                             1060
                  Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




    Algorithm 1 contains the pseudocode describing how RL and automaton learning are
interleaved. The pseudocode applies to both of the methods described in Section 7.1 and
consists of two functions related to automaton learning:
    • The IsCounterexample function (lines 25-26) checks whether the current automa-
      ton state u correctly recognizes the current tuple σ = hσ Σ , σ T , σ G i. It returns true in
      the following cases:

           – a goal state is reached and u is not the accepting state (σ G = > ∧ u 6= uA ), or
           – a dead-end state is reached and u is not the rejecting state (σ T = > ∧ σ G =
             ⊥ ∧ u 6= uR ), or
           – the state is not a terminal state and u is either the accepting or rejecting state
             (σ T = ⊥ ∧ u ∈ {uA , uR }).

    • The OnCounterexampleFound function (lines 27-34) determines what to do when
      a trace λL,O is not correctly recognized by the current automaton:

        (a) Add λL,O to the corresponding set of traces (line 28):
                – to the set of goal traces ΛG                                G
                                             L,O if a goal state is reached (σ = >), or
                – to the set of dead-end traces ΛD  L,O if a dead-end state is reached (σ
                                                                                             T =

                  > ∧ σ G = ⊥), or
                – to the set of incomplete traces ΛIL,O if a terminal state is not reached (σ T =
                  ⊥).
        (b) Run the automaton learner (lines 29-33). If the automaton learning task is
            unsatisfiable, it means that the hypothesis space does not include the automaton
            we are looking for. Therefore, we add a new state to U .18 We adopt this iterative
            deepening strategy to find the subgoal automaton with the lowest number of
            states with at most κ edges from one state to another.
         (c) When a new automaton is learned, the Q-functions are reset (line 34). We later
             explain what resetting the Q-functions means for the two RL algorithms we use.

We now describe the main function of the algorithm:
   1. Initially, the set of states is formed by the initial state u0 , the accepting state uA
      and the rejecting state uR (line 1). The automaton is initialized such that it does not
      accept nor reject anything; that is, there are no edges between the states in U (line 2).
      The set of counterexample traces and the Q-functions are also initialized (lines 3-4).

   2. When an episode starts, the current automaton state u is u0 . One transition is then
      applied depending on the agent’s initial observation L(σ Σ ) (lines 6-7). For instance,
      if the agent initially observes {K} in OfficeWorld’s Coffee task, then u must be
      the state where the agent has already observed K (see Figure 2, p. 1042). The episode
      trace λL,O is initialized with the initial observation L(σ Σ ) (line 8). If a counterexample
      is detected at the beginning of the episode (line 9), a new automaton is learned
      (line 10), the automaton state is reset (line 11) and the episode continues.
18. Non-special states (i.e., not u0 , uA or uR ) are labeled from 1 upwards (u1 , u2 , . . .).


                                                        1061
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




   3. At each episode’s step, we select an action a in state σ Σ (line 14) and apply it in the
      environment (line 15). Based on the new observation L(σ 0Σ ), we get the next state u0
      (line 16) and update the observation trace λL,O (line 17). If a counterexample trace
      λL,O is found (line 18), a new automaton is learned (line 19) and the episode ends
      (line 20). Else, the Q-functions are updated (line 22) and the episode continues.

    Theorem 7.1 shows that if the target automaton is in the hypothesis space, there will only
be a finite number of learning steps in the algorithm before it converges to such automaton
(or an equivalent one).

Theorem 7.1. Given a target finite automaton A∗ , there is no infinite sequence ρ of
automaton-counterexample pairs hAi , ei i such that ∀i: (1) Ai covers all examples e1 , . . . , ei−1 ,
(2) Ai does not cover ei , and (3) Ai is in the finite hypothesis space SM .

Proof. By contradiction. Assume that ρ is infinite. Given that SM is finite, the number
of possible automata is finite. Hence, some automaton A must appear in ρ at least twice,
say as Ai = Aj , i < j. By definition, Ai does not cover ei and Aj covers ei . This is a
contradiction.

    In the following paragraphs we describe important aspects regarding the implementation
of the algorithm. Firstly, we describe how the Q-functions are managed for the two different
algorithms we consider (HRL and QRM). Secondly, we introduce two optimizations to make
automaton learning more efficient.
Management of Q-functions. A critical aspect of the algorithm is how Q-functions are
initialized, updated and reset when a new automaton is learned. In the tabular case, all the
Q-values for the different state-action and/or state-option pairs are initialized to 0 for both
HRL and QRM. The Q-functions are updated using the rules described in Sections 7.1.1
and 7.1.2 respectively. Note that in the case of HRL, Algorithm 1 omits the call to the
function responsible for updating the metacontroller Q-functions, which occurs when the
selected option terminates.19
    Ideally, when a new automaton is learned, we would like to reuse the knowledge from
the previous automata into the new one:

    • In the case of HRL, as described in Section 7.1.1, the policies of all options that have
      been used throughout learning are stored in a dictionary. Therefore, these policies can
      be reused whenever their corresponding formulas appear in the automaton. There are
      two choices to make in this case:

         1. Which Q-functions to update. There are two alternatives: (i) update all the
            stored Q-functions or (ii) update only the Q-functions of the formulas appearing
            in the current automaton. While (i) is more costly, the fact that all Q-functions
            are updated makes them more reliable if they are to be used in the future. Exper-
            imentally, we use (i) for the tabular case and (ii) in the function approximation
            case because of the running time.
19. We have omitted it for the generality of the pseudocode. Note that according to the termination condition
    defined in Section 7.1, an option ends when the episode terminates or the next automaton state is
    different. Therefore, such a check can be done at the end of each step (between lines 22 and 23).


                                                    1062
             Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




       2. Reuse Q-functions by copying those defined for similar formulas. Given that
          options correspond to propositional formulas, we can compare how similar two
          formulas are and, thus, initialize a new Q-function from an existing one. We
          use the number of matching positive literals between two formulas; in case of
          a draw, the formula whose Q-function has been updated the most is chosen.
          Experimentally, the number of matching positive literals works better than the
          number of all matching literals (positive and negative). Taking into account
          negative literals can lead to negative transfer because they usually emerge from
          the determinism constraints to make two formulas mutually exclusive; therefore,
          they do not usually represent the “important” part of the subgoal formula in the
          tasks we use later for evaluation. For this reason, we use the number of matching
          positive literals in the experiments.
     Unlike option policies, it is more difficult to determine when to transfer the metacon-
     troller (i.e., a policy over options) from one automaton to another. In this case, we
     create a new Q-function and do not reuse any previous knowledge.
   • In the case of QRM, the policy at each automaton state selects the action that appears
     best towards satisfying the task’s final goal. Therefore, it can attempt to satisfy
     different formulas for different regions of the state space. This makes the transfer
     of policies between automata non-trivial. In this case we just reinitialize all the Q-
     functions, which causes the agent to forget everything it learned. Nevertheless, the
     reward shaping mechanism introduced before can be helpful to alleviate this problem.
Optimizations. In practice we use two additional optimizations to make the automaton
learning phase more efficient:
  1. The agent does not learn an automaton for the first time until a goal trace is found
     (i.e., the goal is achieved). Experimentally, we have observed that in tasks where
     dead-ends are frequent, the learner constantly finds counterexamples with the aim to
     refine the paths to the rejecting state. Starting to learn automata only when there is
     a goal trace in the counterexample set has proved to be a better strategy.
  2. As explained in Section 5, the rejecting state uR is not included in the set of states
     U if the set of dead-end traces is empty. This avoids an unnecessary increase in the
     number of rules in the hypothesis space, specially in tasks without dead-end states.

8. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of ISA in different domains. Our analysis
focuses on evaluating how the behavior of the RL agent and the task being learned affect
automaton learning and vice versa. Firstly, we describe the main characteristics of our
evaluation methodology. Secondly, we make a thorough analysis of the performance of
our approach using the OfficeWorld (Toro Icarte et al., 2018), CraftWorld (Andreas
et al., 2017) and WaterWorld (Toro Icarte et al., 2018) domains.
    We use ILASP2 to learn the automata with a 2 hour timeout for each automaton
learning task. All experiments ran on 3.40GHz Intel® Core™ i7-6700 processors. The
code is available at https://github.com/ertsiger/induction-subgoal-automata-rl.

                                           1063
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                    D        ∗         ∗          C
                             o                                         u0
                                                          start
                             K
                     ∗                B           ∗
                                                                         o
                                           K
                    A         ∗        ∗          B                    uA


Figure 4: Example of an OfficeWorld grid whose traces cause automata overgeneraliza-
          tion for the Coffee task.



8.1 Experimental Setting
In this section, we describe how we evaluate our approach and introduce some restrictions
that we can apply on the automaton learning task. Then, we explain the nomenclature we
use for the different RL algorithms we evaluate, and how we report the results.

Sets of POMDPs. We consider the problem of learning an automaton given a set of
POMDPs D = {MΣ                  Σ
                   1 , . . . , M|D| }. All POMDPs in D correspond to the same task (e.g., Of-
ficeWorld’s Coffee task) and are enhanced by the same set of observables O. However,
they do not need to share the same state and action spaces. Algorithm 1 is applied on a set
of POMDPs D by iteratively running one full episode for each POMDP, and repeating until
a maximum total number of episodes is reached. We impose a maximum episode length
N to guarantee all episodes terminate in a reasonable amount of time, especially when the
terminal states are hard to reach. There are two reasons for which these sets are useful:

  1. The automaton will generalize to several POMDPs. For example, in OfficeWorld
     the coffee (K) and the office (o) can sometimes be in the same location. Therefore, the
     learned automaton should reflect these two situations: when K and o are together and
     when they are not (see Figure 2, p. 1042). Furthermore, using different POMDPs can
     help to avoid overgeneralization, which is related to the fact that a minimal automaton
     is learned from positive examples only (see discussion in Section 10). Figure 4 shows
     an OfficeWorld grid that if used alone to learn an automaton for Coffee would
     produce the automaton on the right. Since the agent ( ) cannot see any trace that
     reaches o without having seen K, it does not learn that observing K is important to
     reach the goal.

  2. The set of POMDPs may contain some POMDPs in which it is easier to reach the
     goal than in others. Therefore, automaton learning can be initialized earlier. The
     RL agent can then immediately exploit the automaton in the harder POMDPs to
     effectively reduce the amount of exploration needed to reach the goal in them.

                                               1064
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




    The sets of POMDPs used in these experiments are not handcrafted, but randomly gen-
erated (e.g., placing observables randomly in a grid).20 Therefore, (1) there is no guarantee
that certain observations will be seen (e.g., two observables in the same tile of a grid), and
(2) the difficulty of the POMDPs is not fully controlled. Given the two previous conse-
quences of using randomly generated sets of POMDPs, we will evaluate how different sets
affect automaton learning and RL. Note that it is easy to handcraft tasks such that the
target automaton is learned. In the case of a grid-world, like OfficeWorld, we need at
most one grid for each path to the accepting state (in the absence of dead-ends). How-
ever, we believe that using a set of randomly generated POMDPs reduces our bias on the
automaton learning.
Restrictions. The following are restrictions that can be imposed on the automaton struc-
ture, the traces and the observables, and that are later used in the evaluation:21

    • Avoid learning purely negative formulas. We assume that the tasks’ subgoals cannot
      be characterized only by the non-occurrence of certain observables. That is, the
      formula labeling an edge cannot be formed only by negated observables. The minimal
      automata for the tasks we consider in this paper comply with this assumption, which
      helps to slightly simplify the automaton learning phase.

    • Acyclicity. There are tasks whose corresponding minimal automata do not contain
      cycles (i.e., a previously visited automaton state cannot be revisited). For instance, the
      three OfficeWorld tasks we have considered so far belong to this class of automata.
      Thus, the search space can be made smaller by ruling out solutions containing cycles.

    • Trace compression. The traces used as counterexamples in ISA depend on the agent
      behavior. While the agent has not managed to reach the goal, its behavior is random.
      Consequently, the counterexample that the agent provides to the automaton learner
      can be long and include many observables that are irrelevant to the task at hand.
      These two factors, as we will see later, have a negative impact on the time required
      to learn an automaton.

    • Restricted observable set. To simplify the traces, we can use only those observables
      relevant to the task at hand. For example, if the task is CoffeeMail, then the set
      of observables becomes O = {K, o, ∗} instead of O = {K, B, o, A, B, C, D, ∗}. This
      greatly simplifies the automaton learning tasks since the hypothesis space becomes
      smaller and ILASP does not have to discern which are the relevant observables.

Reinforcement Learning Algorithms. We use the following nomenclature for the dif-
ferent RL algorithms applied in the experiments:

    • HRL: HRL where rsuccess = 1.0, rdeadend = 0.0 and rstep = 0.0.

    • HRLG : HRL where rsuccess = 1.0, rdeadend = −N and rstep = −0.01.

    • QRM: QRM without reward shaping.
20. The constraints we impose in the POMDP generation are explained later for each of the used domains.
21. The details of these restrictions (e.g., implementation and examples) are given in Appendix C.1.


                                                 1065
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




    • QRMmin : QRM with reward shaping based on the length of the shortest path to the
      accepting state (dmin ).

    • QRMmax : QRM with reward shaping based on the length of the longest acyclic path
      to the accepting state (dmax ).

In the case of HRL algorithms, the option policies are updated as follows:

    • In the tabular case, we update all the Q-functions of the formulas in the dictionary
      after every step (i.e., all discovered formulas during learning).

    • In the function approximation case, we update only the Q-functions of the formulas
      appearing in the current automaton.

Reporting Results. We report results using tables and figures. In the tables we report
the following average automaton learning statistics across runs where the automaton learner
has not timed out and at least one automaton has been learned:

    • Total time (in seconds) used to run the automaton learner.

    • Number of examples needed to learn the final automaton.

    • Length of the examples used to learn the final automaton.

For the first two cases, the numbers in brackets correspond to the standard error, while in
the last case we use the standard deviation since it is an average of the example lengths
across all runs. We mark with an asterisk (*) cases where either no automaton has been
learned22 or the automaton learner has timed out between 1 and 10 runs. A dash (-) is
used if the number of such cases is higher than 10.
    The figures show the average reward across the POMDPs in set D and the number of
runs (20). Each point of the learning curve represents the sum of rewards obtained by the
greedy policy at a given episode. By default, the greedy policy is evaluated after every
training episode for one episode. The dotted vertical lines correspond to episodes where an
automaton was learned. When the automaton learner times out, the reward is set to 0 for
the entire interaction.

8.2 Experiments in OfficeWorld
The OfficeWorld domain (Toro Icarte et al., 2018), introduced in Section 3, is char-
acterized by the 9 × 12 grid shown in Figure 1 (p. 1039). The set of observables is
O = {K, B, o, A, B, C, D, ∗}. The grid contains one observable of each type except for
the coffee location K (2) and the decoration ∗ (6). The agent and the observables are
randomly placed in the grid using the following criteria:

    • The agent cannot be initially placed with decorations ∗ or observables A − D.

    • The decorations ∗ do not share a location with any other observable.
22. Remember that automata are started to be learned once a goal trace has been observed.


                                                 1066
             Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                    Learning rate (α)                          0.1
                    Exploration rate ()                       0.1
                    Discount factor (γ)                        0.99
                    Number of episodes                         10,000
                    Avoid learning purely negative formulas    3
                    Number of tasks (|D|)                      50
                    Maximum episode length (N )                250
                    Trace compression                          3
                    Enforce acyclicity                         3
                    Number of disjuncts (κ)                    1
                    Use restricted observable set              7

              Table 1: Parameters used in the OfficeWorld experiments.


   • The decorations ∗ and observables A − D cannot be placed next to each other (in-
     cluding diagonals) nor in locations that connect two rooms (e.g., (1, 2) and (1, 3)).

   • Observables A − D and the office o cannot be in the same location.

Note that K, B and o are allowed to be in the same location, and that K and B can share
a location with any observable A − D.
    The tasks in this domain are the ones we introduced in Section 3: Coffee, CoffeeMail
and VisitABCD. These tasks constitute a good test-bed since their automata are different
and they are incrementally more challenging:

   • The Coffee task has 2 subgoals and is represented by a 4 state minimal automaton.

   • The CoffeeMail task has 3 subgoals and is represented by a 6 state minimal au-
     tomaton.

   • The VisitABCD task has 4 subgoals and is represented by a 6 state minimal au-
     tomaton.

In the tasks we consider in this paper, the number of subgoals is defined as the number of
directed edges of the longest acyclic path from the initial state to the accepting state in
the minimal automaton. In general, the longer the sequence of subgoals is, the harder it
becomes to achieve the goal.
    Table 1 shows the parameters used throughout these experiments. The parameters α,
 and γ are the same for both the metacontrollers and the options in the case of HRL.
In the following paragraphs we compare the learning curves produced by the two types of
RL algorithms we have previously presented (HRL and QRM). We show how learning the
automata in an interleaved manner affects RL and how introducing guidance (e.g., reward
shaping in QRM) influences when counterexamples are found. In Appendix C.2 we analyze
how parameter tuning affects automaton learning and reinforcement learning.
    Figure 5 shows how the learning curves with interleaved automaton learning (ISA-HRL,
ISA-QRM) compare to those obtained with handcrafted automata (HRL, QRM). We ob-
serve the following:

                                           1067
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




    • The algorithms using auxiliary guidance (HRLG , QRMmin and QRMmax ) converge
      faster than their respective basic versions (HRL and QRM). The use of auxiliary re-
      ward signals helps to explore the state space more effectively, which results in observ-
      ing counterexample traces early. Consequently, automaton learning is less frequent
      in the last episodes, which is convenient to avoid resetting the Q-functions late and
      leave enough episodes to converge.
    • QRMmax converges faster than QRMmin except in VisitABCD where they perform
      exactly the same because there is a single path to the accepting state. As previously
      shown in Example 7.1, QRMmax provides a positive reward signal for any path that
      allows the agent to approach the accepting state. In contrast, QRMmin only provides
      a positive signal for the shortest path(s). If the shortest path is not available in a
      certain grid (e.g., K and o occurring together), QRMmin gives a negative reward for
      choosing the only available path to the accepting state. Consequently, convergence is
      not as fast as in QRMmax .
    • HRL converges faster than QRM across the different tasks. In the absence of reward
      shaping, QRM needs to satisfy the formula on an edge to the accepting state to start
      propagating positive reward through the different states. On the other hand, HRL
      can independently update the Q-functions of each of the formulas in the automaton
      without having to achieve the task’s goal.
    • The curves for the settings involving automaton learning perform closely to the ones
      with handcrafted automata. Naturally, sometimes the convergence is slower due to the
      fact that a proper automaton cannot be exploited from episode 0. This is noticeable in
      VisitABCD, where a stable automaton requires several relearning steps to be found.
    Figure 6 shows the impact of automaton learning on the HRL and QRM learning curves
of the Coffee task in a single run.23 Remember that an HRL agent only forgets what it
learned at the metacontroller level and keeps the Q-functions of the formulas unchanged.
Besides, it reuses the Q-functions between similar formulas. In contrast, QRM forgets
everything it has learned. The plot illustrates this behavior: while HRL quickly recovers,
QRM requires a few more episodes to match HRL again.
    Table 2 shows the automaton learning statistics for the presented OfficeWorld tasks
using HRLG . We observe that:
    • The running time increases with the number of subgoals. An automaton for the
      VisitABCD task takes (on average) more time than one for the CoffeeMail task
      even though they are both characterized by automata with the same number of states.
    • The number of examples increases with the number of subgoals of the task. The
      number of goal examples is approximately the same as the number of paths to the
      accepting state. For instance, in VisitABCD there is only one such path, so the
      number of goal examples is approximately 1.24 On the other hand, the observables that
23. Note that abrupt changes in the learning curves do not occur in other plots because they are averaged
    across 20 runs. Hence, changes are smoother and not fully visible.
24. The number of goal trace examples can sometimes be higher than 1 for VisitABCD if the first used goal
    trace example is complex (e.g., longer than needed or with many unnecessary symbols), thus making the
    subgoals unclear. In such cases a simpler goal trace might be found as a counterexample.


                                                  1068
                                       Coffee                                            CoffeeMail                                          VisitABCD
                         1.0                                                1.0                                                  1.0
                         0.8                                                0.8                                                  0.8
                         0.6                                                0.6                                                  0.6
        Average reward   0.4                               Average reward   0.4                                 Average reward   0.4
                         0.2                                                0.2                                                  0.2
                         0.0                                                0.0                                                  0.0
                               0   200 400 600 800 1000                           0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000
                                    Number of episodes                                 Number of episodes                                  Number of episodes

                                                         HRL                      HRLG       ISA-HRL      ISA-HRLG


                                       Coffee                                            CoffeeMail                                          VisitABCD
1069                     1.0                                                1.0                                                  1.0
                         0.8                                                0.8                                                  0.8
                         0.6                                                0.6                                                  0.6
        Average reward   0.4                               Average reward   0.4                                 Average reward   0.4
                         0.2                                                0.2                                                  0.2
                         0.0                                                0.0                                                  0.0
                               0   200 400 600 800 1000                           0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000
                                    Number of episodes                                 Number of episodes                                  Number of episodes
                                                                                                                                                                       Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                                       QRM      QRMmin                      QRMmax         ISA-QRM       ISA-QRMmin                        ISA-QRMmax


       Figure 5: Learning curves for different RL algorithms in the OfficeWorld tasks when interleaved automaton learning is off
                 (HRL, QRM) and on (ISA-HRL, ISA-QRM).
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                   1.0

                                   0.8



                  Average reward
                                   0.6

                                   0.4

                                   0.2
                                                                      HRL             QRM
                                   0.0
                                         0       200      400     600     800              1000
                                                       Number of episodes

Figure 6: Example of the impact that interleaved automaton learning has on the learning
          curves of the Coffee task. An automaton is learned around episode 300. While
          HRL quickly recovers (it only has to relearn the policies over options), QRM
          needs some more episodes because it forgets everything.


                Time (s.)                                     # Examples                          Example Length
                                                All          G           D             I
 Coffee           0.4 (0.0)                   8.7 (0.4)   2.4 (0.1)    3.0 (0.1)    3.2 (0.3)           2.8 (2.1)
 CoffeeMail      18.9 (3.3)                  29.0 (1.5)   3.9 (0.3)    9.3 (0.6)   15.8 (1.0)           4.0 (2.6)
 VisitABCD     163.2 (44.3)                  54.9 (3.8)   1.6 (0.1)   15.2 (0.9)   38.1 (3.1)           5.5 (3.1)

    Table 2: Automaton learning statistics for the OfficeWorld tasks using HRLG .


     characterize the CoffeeMail automaton can appear jointly or not; consequently,
     there are more paths to the accepting state and, thus, the required number of goal
     examples increases. Furthermore, while there is a relationship between the number
     of goal examples and the number of paths to the accepting state, we do not observe
     such relationship between the number of dead-end examples and the number of paths
     to the rejecting state. The number of dead-end and incomplete examples is higher
     than that of goal examples; thus, we hypothesize that these two kinds of examples are
     mainly used to refine the automaton given the set of goal examples.


   • The example length increases with the number of subgoals. Intuitively, the more
     subgoals, the longer the agent will have to interact with the environment to achieve
     the goal. Therefore, the observed counterexamples tend to be longer for the tasks
     with more subgoals.



                                                            1070
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




8.3 Experiments in CraftWorld
The CraftWorld domain (Andreas et al., 2017) consists of a 39 × 39 grid without walls.
The grid contains raw materials (wood, grass, iron) and tools/workstations (toolshed, work-
bench, factory, bridge, axe), which constitute the set of observables O. There are 5 labeled
locations for each material, and 2 labeled locations for each tool/workstation. Like in Of-
ficeWorld: (i) the agent moves in the four cardinal directions and remains in the same
location if it tries to cross the grid’s limits, and (ii) at each timestep, the agent knows at
which cell of the grid it is (i.e., the history of achieved subgoals is not stored in the state),
and sees the observables at that cell. The grids are randomly generated such that all items
must be in different locations (i.e., the observations consist of one observable at most).
    The tasks in this domain consist in observing a specific sequence of materials and
tools/workstations. We use the set of tasks in (Toro Icarte et al., 2018) for evaluation:

  1. MakePlank: wood, toolshed.

  2. MakeStick: wood, workbench.

  3. MakeCloth: grass, factory.

  4. MakeRope: grass, toolshed.

  5. MakeShears: iron, wood, workbench (the iron and the wood can be observed in any
     order).

  6. MakeBridge: iron, wood, factory (the iron and the wood can be observed in any
     order).

  7. GetGold: iron, wood, factory, bridge (the iron and the wood can be observed in any
     order).

  8. MakeBed: wood, toolshed, grass, workbench (the grass can be observed anytime
     before the workbench.)

  9. MakeAxe: wood, workbench, iron, toolshed (the iron can be observed anytime before
     the toolshed).

 10. GetGem: wood, workbench, iron, toolshed, axe (the iron can be observed anytime
     before the toolshed).

Tasks 1-4 have 2 subgoals and are represented by 3 state minimal automata. Tasks 5-6
have 3 subgoals and are represented by 5 state minimal automata. Task 7 has 4 subgoals
and is represented by a 6 state minimal automaton. Tasks 8-9 have 4 subgoals and are
represented by 7 state minimal automata. Task 10 has 5 subgoals and is represented by
an 8 state minimal automaton. The agent gets a reward of 1 upon the goal’s achievement
and 0 otherwise. Unlike OfficeWorld, this domain has no dead-end states, so the set of
dead-end examples is always empty.
    Table 3 lists the parameters used in these experiments. The only difference with respect
to the default parameters used in OfficeWorld is the number of tasks |D|, which is 100

                                              1071
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                        Learning rate (α)                                0.1
                        Exploration rate ()                             0.1
                        Discount factor (γ)                              0.99
                        Number of episodes                               10,000
                        Avoid learning purely negative formulas          3
                        Number of tasks (|D|)                            100
                        Maximum episode length (N )                      250
                        Trace compression                                3
                        Enforce acyclicity                               3
                        Number of disjuncts (κ)                          1
                        Use restricted observable set                    7

                 Table 3: Parameters used in the CraftWorld experiments.

in this case. Experimentally, we observed that using 100 instead of 50 was a better choice
for tasks 8-10 which, as we will explain later, occasionally time out.
    Table 4 shows the automaton learning statistics for the presented CraftWorld tasks
using HRLG . Note that we have divided the tasks into several groups according to the
number of subgoals they have and the number of states that their corresponding minimal
automata have. Figure 7 shows the learning curves for one representative of each group of
tasks25 with and without interleaved learning of automata. We observe the following:
    • Like in the OfficeWorld tasks, the more subgoals and automaton states, the higher
      the values for the collected metrics (running time, number of examples and example
      length). Besides, the number of goal examples still corresponds to the number of
      paths from the initial state to the accepting state. The figure also shows that, as
      before, learning becomes more frequent as the tasks become harder.

    • The automaton learning statistics are very close between groups of tasks, especially
      for the ones having simpler automata. As the tasks become harder, the differences
      between tasks in the same group become bigger (e.g., MakeBed and MakeAxe).
      Naturally, it is extremely unlikely that an agent observes two equivalent sets of exam-
      ples for two different tasks, especially when examples become longer (as we have seen
      before, the more subgoals a task has, the longer the examples become). Therefore, it
      is normal that these differences arise for harder tasks.

    • The running time increases dramatically from GetGold to MakeBed and MakeAxe.
      Actually, the automaton learner has timed out a few times for the latter tasks: 5 for
      MakeBed and 4 for MakeAxe. Furthermore, in the case of GetGem, the harder
      task, it has timed out 9 times. The number of timeouts varies between algorithms,
      which is probably caused by exploration. For example, standard HRL has timed out
      8 times for MakeAxe and only once for MakeBed.

    • The difference between the curves where interleaved automaton learning is on (ISA-
      HRL, ISA-QRM) and off (HRL, QRM) is small for most of the tasks, like in Of-
25. The learning curves are similar between members of each group, so we report just one of them.


                                                  1072
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                    Time (s.)                       # Examples                     Example Length
                                         All              G             I
 MakePlank              0.2 (0.0)       4.4 (0.3)      1.4 (0.1)       3.0 (0.3)         2.2 (1.2)
 MakeStick              0.2 (0.0)       3.6 (0.2)      1.2 (0.1)       2.4 (0.2)         2.2 (1.4)
 MakeCloth              0.3 (0.0)       4.9 (0.4)      1.2 (0.1)       3.6 (0.4)         2.4 (1.5)
 MakeRope               0.2 (0.0)       4.2 (0.3)      1.2 (0.1)       2.9 (0.3)         2.4 (1.4)
 MakeShears             2.0 (0.3)      16.2 (0.8)      3.3 (0.2)      12.8 (0.8)         3.4 (1.7)
 MakeBridge             1.7 (0.3)      15.5 (1.3)      3.0 (0.2)      12.5 (1.2)         3.0 (1.5)
 GetGold              60.7 (25.7)      30.6 (3.2)      2.2 (0.2)      28.5 (3.2)         4.0 (1.9)
 MakeBed         2140.4 (1071.7)*     37.1 (3.1)*     3.8 (0.3)*     33.3 (3.0)*        4.0 (1.7)*
 MakeAxe          2990.3 (717.7)*     46.6 (3.5)*     3.3 (0.2)*     43.3 (3.5)*        4.3 (1.9)*
 GetGem          6179.4 (2784.8)*   116.8 (14.7)*     1.2 (0.1)*   115.6 (14.7)*        5.2 (2.0)*

    Table 4: Automaton learning statistics for the CraftWorld tasks using HRLG .


     ficeWorld. This shows that the induced automata are useful to learn a policy that
     reaches the goal. Note that for the hardest tasks (MakeAxe, MakeBed and Get-
     Gem) the gap between HRL and QRM with respect to ISA-HRL and ISA-QRM is
     usually bigger than for other tasks. This is due to the presence of timeouts in the
     approaches that induce automata, as explained before.

   • When an automaton is handcrafted, QRMmin performs like QRMmax because the
     minimum and maximum distances to the accepting state are the same in these au-
     tomata. This similarity also occurs when an automaton is learned; however, they are
     not identical since the intermediately learned automata may cause some variances.

   • The approaches not using guidance (HRL, QRM) start converging faster than the ones
     that use it (HRLG , QRMmin , QRMmax ). However, the latter eventually learn to reach
     the goal earlier in the interaction. The initially slower convergence for the approaches
     using guidance can be due to the fact that guidance encourages more exploration. A
     CraftWorld grid is bigger than an OfficeWorld grid, which causes the agent
     to explore the environment for longer and delays the start of convergence. However,
     all the knowledge acquired while exploring is later quickly exploited and the learning
     curves surpass those of the approaches without guidance.

   In Section 10 we present several proposals for future work to reduce the running time
that ILASP needs to find an automaton, thus making the approach more scalable to tasks
whose minimal automata have many states, such as GetGem.

8.4 Experiments in WaterWorld
The WaterWorld domain (Toro Icarte et al., 2018), which is illustrated in Figure 8,
consists of a 2D box containing 12 balls of 6 different colors (2 balls per color). Each ball
moves at a constant speed in a given direction. The balls bounce only when they collide
with a wall. The agent is a white ball that can change its velocity in any of the four cardinal
directions. The set of observables O = {r, g, b, y, c, m} is formed by the balls’ colors. The

                                               1073
                                                                              MakeStick                                              MakeShears                                             MakeStick                                              MakeShears
                                                                 1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0
                                                Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward


                                                                 0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                                                                 0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                                                                 0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                                                                 0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                                                 0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                                                                       0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
                                                                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes
                                                                               GetGold                                                MakeBed                                                GetGold                                                MakeBed
                                                                 1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0
                                                Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward


                                                                 0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                                                                 0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                                                                 0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                                                                 0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                                                                 0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0                                   1074
                                                                       0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                          0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
                                                                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes
                                                                                GetGem                                                                                                        GetGem
                                                                 1.0                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QRM
                                                Average reward                                                                                                Average reward


                                                                 0.8                                                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                     HRL                                                                                                          QRMmin
                                                                 0.6                                                                 HRLG                                      0.6                                                                QRMmax
                                                                 0.4                                                                 ISA-HRL                                   0.4                                                                ISA-QRM
                                                                 0.2                                                                 ISA-HRLG                                  0.2                                                                ISA-QRMmin
                                                                 0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ISA-QRMmax
                                                                       0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000                                                                                 0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
                                                                             Number of episodes                                                                                            Number of episodes
                                               Figure 7: Learning curves for different RL algorithms in the CraftWorld tasks when interleaved automaton learning is off
                                                         (HRL, QRM) and on (ISA-HRL, ISA-QRM). The ISA curves for MakeBed and GetGem are below the handcrafted
                                                         automata curves because of the timeout runs. When a run finishes successfully, both types of curves are similar.
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




             Figure 8: The WaterWorld domain (Toro Icarte et al., 2018).

agent observes a color when it overlaps with the ball painted with it. For example, in
Figure 8 the agent would observe {g} (green). Note that several balls can overlap at the
same time; thus, the agent can simultaneously observe several colors. The tasks we consider
consist in observing a sequence of colors in a specific order:
   • RGB: red (r) then green (g) then blue (b). It consists of 3 subgoals and is represented
     by a 4 state minimal automaton.

   • RG-B: red (r) then green (g) and (independently) blue (b). Note that there are two
     sequences and they can be interleaved. For instance, h{r}, {g}, {b}i, h{b}, {r}, {g}i
     and h{r}, {b}, {g}i are three possible goal traces. Note that RGB is a subcase of this
     task. It consists of 3 subgoals and is represented by a 6 state minimal automaton.

   • RGBC: touch red (r) then green (g) then blue (b) then cyan (c). It consists of 4
     subgoals and is represented by a 5 state minimal automaton.
The agent gets a reward of 1 upon the goal’s achievement and 0 otherwise. The tasks we
consider have no dead-end states, like in CraftWorld. The balls start with a random
position and direction at the beginning of each episode.
    Unlike OfficeWorld and Craftworld, the state space is continuous, so we cannot
use tabular Q-functions. Instead, like Toro Icarte et al. (2018), we use a Double DQN
(DDQN, van Hasselt et al., 2016) to approximate the Q-functions in both HRL and QRM.
The neural networks consist of 4 hidden layers of 64 neurons, each followed by a ReLU. A
network’s input is a vector containing the absolute position and velocity of the agent, and
the relative positions and velocities of the other balls. Just like in a standard DQN (Mnih
et al., 2015), the output contains the estimated Q-value for each action (or option in the
case of a metacontroller in HRL). We train the neural networks using the Adam optimizer
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) with α = 1 × 10−5 . The target networks are updated every 100 steps.
A total of 50,000 episodes are run for each setting with parameters  = 0.1 and γ = 0.9.
The Q-functions are updated using batches of 32 experiences uniformly sampled from an
experience replay buffer of size 50,000. The learning starts after collecting 1,000 samples.
    Table 5 lists the mentioned neural network hyperparameters along with the automaton
learning and RL parameters. The main difference with respect to the previous experiments
is the use of a POMDP set consisting of a single POMDP. Since the balls in WaterWorld

                                           1075
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                       Learning rate (α)                                 1 × 10−5
                       Exploration rate ()                              0.1
                       Discount factor (γ)                               0.9
                       Number of episodes                                50,000
                       Maximum episode length (N )                       150
                       Replay memory size                                50,000
                       Replay start size                                 1,000
                       Batch size                                        32
                       Number of tasks (|D|)                             1
                       Target network update frequency                   100
                       Trace compression                                 3
                       Enforce acyclicity                                3
                       Number of disjuncts (κ)                           1
                       Avoid learning purely negative formulas           3
                       Use restricted observable set                     7

                 Table 5: Parameters used in the WaterWorld experiments.

                    Time (s.)                     # Examples                    Example Length
                                        All            G            I
       RGB           3.7 (0.3)       26.9 (1.1)     7.0 (0.4)   20.0 (0.9)               4.3 (2.3)
       RG-B       129.5 (23.9)       48.4 (1.2)    15.4 (0.4)   33.0 (1.0)               4.4 (2.2)
       RGBC       111.8 (23.1)       61.4 (2.7)    11.7 (0.5)   49.6 (2.4)               5.5 (2.7)

     Table 6: Automaton learning statistics for the WaterWorld tasks using HRLG .

are constantly moving, it is easier for the agent to observe all possible combinations of
observables. Therefore, we do not need to use a larger set to learn a general automaton.
    Figure 9 shows the learning curves for the WaterWorld tasks introduced before.
We show how those that use automaton learning (ISA-HRL, ISA-QRM) compare to those
obtained with handcrafted automata (HRL, QRM). The greedy policy was evaluated every
500 episodes: the evaluation consisted in running the greedy policy for 10 different episodes
and averaging the reward obtained across them. The learning curves are smoothed using
a sliding window of size 1,000. Table 6 shows the automaton learning statistics for these
tasks using HRLG .26 We observe the following:
    • The tasks with more subgoals run the automaton learner more often. For instance,
      automaton learning is concentrated at the beginning of the interaction in RGB; in
      contrast, it is called at many different times in RGBC.

    • Even though the minimal automaton of RG-B has more states than that of RGB,
      the reward is sparser in the latter since there are not as many ways to achieve the
      goal as in the former. This is why RGB’s learning curve does not converge faster
      than RG-B’s. Note that the time and the number of examples needed to learn the
26. The automaton learning statistics for the other RL algorithms are similar, so we do not report them.


                                                   1076
                 Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




       RG-B automaton are higher than those for RGB because its set of automaton states
       is bigger. Finally, the fact that RG-B is the task requiring more goal traces shows
       that it is the task where achieving the goal is easier although it makes automaton
       learning harder.
    • Even though RGBC has more subgoals than RG-B, its running time is lower. The
      most likely reason is that the minimal automaton for RG-B has more states and,
      therefore, the hypothesis space is bigger. Naturally, the bigger the hypothesis space
      is, the harder it becomes to find a solution. However, as we saw in the grid-world
      experiments, the tasks with more subgoals require more examples. In particular,
      RGBC needs more incomplete examples than RG-B possibly because there are more
      sequences of candidate subgoals to be discarded.
    • The approaches based on HRL perform better than the ones based on QRM, specially
      in RGBC. We hypothesize there are two possible causes for this behavior:
         (i) The Q-functions resetting. Remember that while in HRL only the metacon-
             trollers are reset, all the Q-functions in QRM are reset. Given that new automata
             are learned throughout the entire interaction, the agents using QRM rarely have
             the chance to converge to a stable policy.
        (ii) While the HRL agent commits to satisfying a given formula (determined by
             the metacontroller) at a given step, the QRM agent selects the globally best
             action at each step. Unlike the grid-worlds, in this domain the observables are
             constantly changing their position, so it can be more difficult to learn a function
             that generalizes to many scenarios (i.e., different initializations of the task).27
       To determine which of these two causes is more plausible, we examine the performance
       of QRM with a handcrafted automaton. In general, the performance of approaches
       using automaton learning are very similar to the ones using a handcrafted automaton.
       This shows that the forgetting effect is not as present in WaterWorld as in the grid-
       world domains. The use of experience replay is likely to be responsible for this because
       the agents can update the Q-functions without having to relive successful experiences
       that happened in the past. Therefore, we conclude that cause (ii) is better supported
       by our experiments.
    • There is barely any difference between the learning curves of the algorithms that do
      not use auxiliary guidance (HRL, QRM), and the ones that do use it (HRLG , QRMmin ,
      QRMmax ). Camacho et al. (2019) also showed similar behavior in the case of QRM
      using handcrafted reward machines with a different reward shaping mechanism. We
      hypothesize that since the Q-functions must generalize to different settings (remember
      that all episodes start with a random configuration), an agent that does not use guid-
      ance might explore similarly to an agent that does use it. Therefore, using guidance
      does not help much in these tasks.

27. We highlight that our evaluation QRM in the WaterWorld domain differs a bit from the one by Toro
    Icarte et al. (2018). While we randomly initialize the environment at the start of every episode, they use
    a fixed map. In the latter case, QRM quickly converges in RGBC (we have been able to reproduce the
    results), but we consider that learning Q-functions that generalize to diverse scenarios is more interesting.


                                                      1077
                                                                                   RGB                                                        RG-B                                                      RGBC
                                                                 1.0                                                        1.0                                                        1.0
                                                Average reward                                             Average reward                                             Average reward


                                                                 0.8                                                        0.8                                                        0.8
                                                                 0.6                                                        0.6                                                        0.6
                                                                 0.4                                                        0.4                                                        0.4
Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                                                 0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2
                                                                 0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0
                                                                       0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                          0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                          0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                                                             Number of episodes                                         Number of episodes                                         Number of episodes
                                                                                                        HRL                       HRLG          ISA-HRL         ISA-HRLG
                                                                                   RGB                                                        RG-B                                                      RGBC
                                                                 1.0                                                        1.0                                                        1.0                                       1078
                                                Average reward                                             Average reward                                             Average reward


                                                                 0.8                                                        0.8                                                        0.8
                                                                 0.6                                                        0.6                                                        0.6
                                                                 0.4                                                        0.4                                                        0.4
                                                                 0.2                                                        0.2                                                        0.2
                                                                 0.0                                                        0.0                                                        0.0
                                                                       0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                          0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000                          0   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
                                                                             Number of episodes                                         Number of episodes                                         Number of episodes
                                                                                  QRM          QRMmin                       QRMmax           ISA-QRM          ISA-QRMmin                          ISA-QRMmax
                                               Figure 9: Learning curves for different RL algorithms in the WaterWorld tasks when interleaved automaton learning is off
                                                         (HRL, QRM) and on (ISA-HRL, ISA-QRM).
             Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




8.5 Summary of the Results
Throughout this section we have observed several commonalities between the results across
domains. We provide a short summary of the main common findings below:

   • The higher the number of task subgoals and the number of required states are, the
     higher the values for the collected metrics (running time, number of examples and
     example length).

   • The number of goal examples used to learn an automaton is approximately the same
     as the number of paths from the initial state to the accepting state. Incomplete
     and dead-end examples are used to refine those paths and increase as the number of
     subgoals and automaton states increases.

   • Using auxiliary reward signals (or guidance) has been shown useful to speed up conver-
     gence in grid-world tasks. Importantly, as mainly shown in OfficeWorld, it helps
     to learn an automaton early in the interaction and thus reduces relearning later. This
     is extremely helpful in QRM since it resets all the Q-functions when a new automaton
     is learned. On the other hand, in WaterWorld there is not a big difference between
     approaches using guidance and those which do not use it.

   • HRL usually converges faster than QRM, specially in the absence of guidance. In
     such case, QRM needs to satisfy the goal at least once to start propagating reward
     through the automaton states. In contrast, HRL can update the Q-functions of the
     formulas independently and, importantly, these can be kept throughout the entire
     learning process.

   • The difference between the approaches that learn an automaton and those that use
     a handcrafted one is not big except for the cases where an automaton cannot be
     normally learned under the imposed timeout. This shows that the learned automata
     properly represent the subgoal structure of the tasks.

9. Related Work
The following sections describe the works that share more commonalities with ours. First,
we qualitatively compare subgoal automata and ISA with other forms of automata and
automaton learning methods that have been recently used in RL. Second, we briefly discuss
some work on discovering hierarchies in HRL. Finally, we describe some of the work on
breaking symmetries in graphs and automata in particular.

9.1 Automata in Reinforcement Learning
In this section we describe others forms of automata that have been used in reinforcement
learning and how their structure has been exploited. We compare these automata and the
approaches for learning them to subgoal automata and ISA respectively.

Reward Machines. Subgoal automata are similar to another formalism that uses au-
tomata in RL called reward machines (RMs, Toro Icarte et al., 2018). Both automata

                                           1079
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




consist of edges labeled by propositional formulas over a set of observables O. The main
differences with respect to our formalism are:

   1. RMs do not have explicit accepting and rejecting states. Therefore, they can be used
      to represent continuing tasks.

   2. RMs specify a reward-transition function δr : U × U → [S × A × S → R] that maps
      an automaton state pair into a reward function.

Toro Icarte et al. (2018) also define simple RMs where the reward-transition function δr :
U × U → R maps an automaton state pair into a reward instead of a reward function.
The authors propose the QRM (Q-learning for Reward Machines) algorithm to exploit the
structure of RMs, which was one of the RL algorithms we have applied on our automata.
    Different methods for simultaneously learning and exploiting simple reward machines
from observation traces have been recently proposed. Toro Icarte et al. (2019) introduce
LRM, which formulates the RM learning problem as a discrete optimization problem and use
a local search algorithm called tabu search to solve it. They use QRM to learn the policies.
Unlike our approach, LRM starts by performing random actions for a fixed number of steps
to collect some traces. These traces are used for two things:

   1. Learn an initial automaton.

   2. Know which is the set of observables O of the task.28 This is done by looping through
      the traces. Interestingly, if two events happen at the same time in these traces, then
      they will constitute a single observable. For example, if the traces show that K and o
      happen together in OfficeWorld’s Coffee task, then the set observables O would
      include a single observable Ko instead of two distinct observables K and o.

Note that these two aspects are different from our approach (ISA) because:

   1. ISA does not learn automata from a set of randomly collected traces. Instead, it
      learns a new automaton when a counterexample is found.

   2. ISA is given the set of observables O in advance. However, we could also determine
      the set of observables just like LRM does.

Even though LRM learns an initial automaton from random traces, it uses counterexamples
to refine the automata as well. LRM is also different from ISA in the following aspects:

    • The traces used by LRM consist of observations formed by a single observable. This
      is due to the process for getting the set of observables O described above. Therefore,
      conjunctions are not learned but assumed to be given in O. This can be problematic
      if the automaton is to be used in a task where the set of observables is different.
      Keeping observables separated and explicitly learning the conjunctions as we do is
      less constrained, but allows for better generalization. Note that the observations we
      use can contain an arbitrary number of observables.
28. The set can be later extended if more observables are found in the following steps.


                                                   1080
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




   • LRM does not need to enforce mutual exclusivity between the edges to two different
     automaton states. The reason is that each observable in O always happens alone, as
     explained before. In contrast, ISA needs to enforce mutual exclusivity (see Section 6).

   • LRM’s optimization scheme is used to find an automaton that is good at predicting
     what will be the next different observable given a maximum number of states. Thus,
     they do not aim to find a minimal automaton. In contrast, ISA aims to find a minimal
     automaton that covers the example traces through the use of an iterative deepening
     strategy on the number of states. This has two main consequences:

         – The fact that ISA looks for a minimal automaton using only positive examples
           (i.e., traces obtained from the agent-environment interaction) makes it prone to
           overgeneralize in certain tasks (see Section 10 for a detailed discussion). LRM
           does not suffer from this problem given that they do not look for a minimal
           automaton, but an automaton that is good at predicting what will be the next
           different observation.
         – Since LRM aims to be good at predicting which will be the next different ob-
           servation, it uses traces where no two consecutive observations are equal. This
           can be seen as a form of trace compression similar to the one we use in the
           experiments (see details in Appendix C.1). Therefore, their method cannot be
           applied to tasks like counting how many times an observable has been seen in a
           row, while ours can handle these tasks as long as the traces are not compressed.

   • LRM does not classify examples into different categories. The reward machine it aims
     to learn can also represent continuing tasks; therefore, they do not use an explicit
     notion of goal or dead-end as we do.

   • LRM does not apply a symmetry breaking mechanism and may consider different
     equivalent solutions during the search for an automaton. ISA uses symmetry breaking
     constraints to shrink the search space and speed up automaton learning.
    Xu et al. (2020) propose another algorithm to learn simple RMs called JIRP (Joint
Inference of Reward Machines and Policies). The authors express the automaton learning
problem as a SAT problem and use QRM to learn a policy for a given task. JIRP is similar
to ISA in the following aspects:
   1. It aims to learn a minimal automaton based on an iterative deepening strategy on the
      number of states.

   2. The automaton learner is triggered when a counterexample is found.

   3. It learns only from positive examples (i.e., attainable traces by the RL agent).

   4. It learns RMs for episodic tasks where the reward is 1 only when the goal is achieved
      and 0 otherwise.29 Therefore, like in our case, these RMs consist of absorbing accept-
      ing and rejecting states. The rejecting state, however, seems to be induced implicitly
      and not indicated explicitly as in our case.
29. Note that we assumed 0/1 reward tasks only when we used QRM and not HRL (see Section 7.1.2).


                                               1081
                       Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Unlike ISA, the traces used by JIRP do not only consist of observations but they also include
rewards. Crucially, these sequences of rewards are used to determine counterexamples: if a
trace in the environment yields a different sequence of rewards in the automaton, then that
trace is a counterexample. Furthermore, there are four other differences:

    • JIRP does not call the automaton learner after every single counterexample. Instead,
      it accumulates them into a batch and calls the automaton learner periodically.

    • JIRP learns reward machines whose edges are labeled by sets of observables, which
      is similar to what LRM does.30 In contrast, the edges of a subgoal automaton are
      labeled by propositional formulas over a set of observables.

    • JIRP learns conditions for the loop transitions. In contrast, our approach takes loop
      transitions only when outgoing transitions to other states cannot be taken.

    • JIRP reuses the Q-functions learned by QRM when a new automaton is learned. The
      Q-function at a given state u is reused in a new state u0 if they are equivalent. Two
      states are equivalent if they yield the exact same sequence of rewards for all traces in
      the set of counterexamples. We decided not to include this mechanism in the QRM
      experiments for several reasons. As explained in Section 7.1.2, the policy at a given
      automaton state selects the action that appears to be best to achieve the task’s final
      goal. In other words, that policy might aim to satisfy any of the formulas on the
      outgoing edges, so it is unclear what should be transferred to the new automaton.
      Importantly, the transfer proposed by Xu et al. is based on the sequence of rewards a
      trace yields from a given automaton state, and not on which subgoals the policies are
      trying to achieve. In our view, the latter aspect is what should be taken into account.

    Gaon and Brafman (2020) learn a deterministic finite automaton (DFA), so the tran-
sitions are labeled by symbols instead of propositional formulas. However, it still shares
some commonalities with reward machines and subgoal automata. The tasks they consider
are also episodic and terminate when the goal is reached. The main difference with re-
spect to subgoal automata is that the set of observables O contains an observable for each
action. Therefore, their automata are learned from action traces. The authors use two
well-known algorithms from the grammatical inference literature (de la Higuera, 2010) to
learn a minimal DFA: L* and EDSM (Evidence Driven State Merging):

    • L* (Angluin, 1987) is an active learning algorithm that can learn a DFA from just a
      polynomial number of queries. Typically, two types of queries are considered:

          – Membership queries: the learner requests to label a trace (i.e., state whether the
            trace belongs to the language or not).
          – Equivalence queries: the learner asks whether its automaton captures the target
            language. If it does not, a counterexample is returned.

30. Xu et al.’s paper shows RMs whose edges are labeled by propositional formulas. However, we have
    verified through personal communication with the authors that the transitions are indeed labeled by sets
    of observables. The propositional formulas were used to make the representation simpler in the paper.


                                                   1082
             Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




     Gaon and Brafman use the RL agent as the oracle. A membership query is answered
     by trying to reproduce the sequence of actions in it, whereas an equivalence query
     is answered by checking if the trace has been observed in the past. Note that the
     equivalence queries can be unfeasible traces and, thus, overgeneralization is controlled.
     However, their method might be prone to making wrong guesses, specially in large
     state and action spaces where it is unlikely that a given trace has been seen before.

   • EDSM (Lang et al., 1998) is a state-merging approach to automaton learning, which
     consists of two phases:

       1. Build an initial DFA called Prefix Tree Acceptor (PTA), which is a tree-structured
          DFA built from the prefixes of a finite set of traces such that it accepts the pos-
          itive traces in the set and rejects the negative ones.
       2. Iteratively choose pairs of equivalent states to merge and produce a new automa-
          ton. If the automaton does not cover all the examples, it backtracks and chooses
          another pair of states. When no additional merging is possible, it stops.

     The automaton learned by EDSM depends on the quality of the example set and,
     under specific conditions, the algorithm is proved to converge to the minimal DFA.
     The complexity of the algorithm is polynomial in the number of examples.
     To apply EDSM, Gaon and Brafman keep a record of the traces that reach the goal
     and those that do not reach the goal. Note that this is similar to what we do, although
     our dead-end and incomplete traces would be both inside their set of traces that do
     not reach the goal because they do not have an explicit rejecting state.
     State-merging approaches follow a different path to minimality than our approach and
     Xu et al.’s. The former start from a big set of states and aim to reduce it, whereas
     the latter begin with a small set of states and increase it when becomes insufficient to
     cover the examples. Nevertheless, even though these approaches are slightly different,
     they can both generate overgeneralized automata if only positive examples are used,
     as we show in Section 10.

The authors combine the automaton learning approaches with Q-learning and a model-based
RL algorithm called R-max (Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002) and test them in tabular tasks.
Note that while the minimality of our automaton is dependent on the maximum number of
edges between two states (κ), the approaches by Xu et al. (2020) and Gaon and Brafman
(2020) do not mention this dependence (they both show examples of automata involving
disjunctions).
    Automaton structures have also been exploited in reward machines to give bonus re-
ward signals. Camacho et al. (2019) convert reward functions expressed in various formal
languages (e.g., linear temporal logic) into RMs, and propose a reward shaping method that
runs value iteration on the RM states. Similarly, Camacho et al. (2017) use automata as
representations of non-Markovian rewards and exploit their structure to guide the search of
an MDP planner using reward shaping. In our case, we have proposed two reward shaping
mechanisms based on the maximum and minimum distances to the accepting state.

                                            1083
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Hierarchical Abstract Machines (HAMs). Throughout the paper we have shown
the connection between subgoal automata and the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999),
which is one of the classical approaches for HRL along with HAMs (Parr & Russell, 1997)
and MAXQ (Dietterich, 2000). Even though our method is closer to options, it is also similar
to HAMs in that both use an automaton. However, HAMs are non-deterministic automata
whose transitions can invoke lower level machines and are not labeled by observables (the
high-level policy consists in deciding which transition to fire).
Relational Macros. Torrey et al. (2007) learn a kind of automata, similar to subgoal
automata, called relational macros, which are finite state machines where both states and
transitions are characterized by first-order logic formulas. These formulas are built on the
first-order logic predicates that describe the environment states. The formulas on the au-
tomaton states indicate which action to take, while the formulas on the transitions say when
the transition is taken. The learning of the relational macros is done in two phases. The
structure learning phase finds a sequence of actions that distinguishes traces reaching the
goal from those which do not and composes them into an automaton. In the ruleset learning
phase, their system learns the conditions for choosing actions and for taking transitions.
The authors use Aleph (Srinivasan, 2001), an inductive-logic programming system, to learn
the rules in both phases from positive and negative examples. The learned automaton is
used for transfer learning: the target task follows the strategy encoded by the automaton
for some steps to estimate the Q-values of the actions in the strategy, and then stops using
the automaton and acts according to the Q-values. This approach differs from ours in that:
   1. The traces it uses to learn the automata are formed by actions and not high-level
      events (observables). However, similarly to us, the traces are divided into groups
      depending on whether they reach the goal or not.

   2. The transitions are labeled by first-order logic formulas instead of propositional for-
      mulas.

   3. It learns logic rules that describe what action to take in each automaton state, while
      we learn policies to choose the actions.

   4. A relational macro requires that the target task has the same action space as the source
      task since the rules are defined on these actions. In contrast, a subgoal automaton
      can be reused in another task if the set of observables and the goal are the same, even
      when the state and action spaces are different.
Note that the first-order logic predicates are similar to our observables. Even though ob-
servables are propositional, both provide a high-level abstraction of the state space.
Policy Graphs. Meuleau et al. (1999) propose to represent policies with finite memory
using a class of finite-state automata called policy graphs. Like subgoal automata, policy
graphs are applied to POMDPs. The states of a policy graph are labeled with actions,
while each edge is labeled by a single visible state.31 This differs from our case where the
edges are labeled by propositional formulas over a set of high-level events (i.e., the observ-
ables). Another difference is that the transition function between states in the automaton is
31. Note that we use the terminology for POMDPs introduced in Section 2.


                                                1084
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




probabilistic. This function is represented as a parametric function and is learned through
stochastic gradient descent using a set of traces obtained by the RL agent. Similarly to us,
policy graphs are applied to tasks with a subset of states characterizing the tasks’ goals.
Moore Machines. Koul et al. (2019) transform the policy encoded by a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) into a Moore machine, which is a quantized version of the RNN. That is,
the Moore machine is defined in terms of quantized state and observation representations
of the RNN. Unlike our method and the previously presented works, the authors use the
resulting machine for interpretability and do not exploit its structure.

9.2 Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL)
In Section 7 we described two RL algorithms for exploiting the structure of a subgoal
automaton using the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999), which is one of the classical
approaches for HRL along with HAMs (Parr & Russell, 1997) and MAXQ (Dietterich,
2000).
    One of the core problems in the options framework is finding a set of options that
helps to maximize the return instead of handcrafting such set. This problem is known
as option discovery. The method we propose in this paper, ISA, can certainly be seen as
an option discovery method. The family of option discovery methods where ISA fits best
are bottleneck methods, which find “bridges” between regions of the latent state space. In
particular, each state of our automata can represent a different region of the state space,
and the bottleneck is represented by the formula connecting two automaton states. The
option discovery method most similar to ours, except for the reward machine related ones
(see Section 9.1), is due to McGovern and Barto (2001). Their approach uses diverse density
to find landmark states in state traces, and it is similar to ours because:
  1. It learns from traces.

  2. It classifies traces into two different categories depending on whether they achieve the
     goal or not.

  3. It interleaves option discovery and learning of policies for the discovered options.
The main difference is that while our bottlenecks are propositional logic formulas, theirs
are crucial states to achieve the task’s goal. Therefore, they do not use/require a set of
propositional events (i.e., observables) to be provided in advance.
    Just like some option discovery methods (e.g., McGovern & Barto, 2001; Stolle & Precup,
2002), our approach requires the task to be solved at least once. Other methods (e.g.,
Menache et al., 2002; Simsek & Barto, 2004; Simsek et al., 2005; Machado et al., 2017)
discover options without solving the task and, thus, are also suited to continuing tasks.
    Alternative formalisms to automata for expressing formal languages, like grammars,
have been used to discover options. Lange and Faisal (2019) induce a straight-line gram-
mar, a non-branching and loop-free context-free grammar, which can only generate a single
string. The authors use greedy algorithms to find a straight-line grammar from the shortest
sequence of actions that leads to the goal. The production rules are then flattened, lead-
ing to one macro-action (a sequence of actions) per production rule. These macro-actions
constitute the set of options.

                                           1085
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




   Similarly to options, there has been work on learning the structures used in other HRL
frameworks. Leonetti et al. (2012) synthesize a HAM from the set of shortest solutions to
a non-deterministic planning problem, and use it to refine the choices at non-deterministic
points through RL. Mehta et al. (2008) propose a method for discovering MAXQ hierarchies
from a trace that reaches the task’s goal.

9.3 Symmetry Breaking
The symmetry breaking mechanism that we have proposed in this paper has been shown to
help decrease the time needed to find a subgoal automaton that covers a set of examples.
In this section we briefly mention some of the most related works to ours; that is, those
addressing the problem of breaking symmetries in graphs (specifically, automata) or that
use ASP to encode problems.
    SAT-based approaches to learning deterministic finite automata (DFA) have used sym-
metry breaking constraints to shrink the search space. Heule and Verwer (2010) reduce
the DFA learning problem to a graph coloring problem, which is translated into SAT. The
graph to be colored is derived from the Prefix Tree Acceptor (PTA, see p. 1083) of the
examples by connecting two states if they cannot be merged. The vertices in a k-clique
must be colored differently and there are k! different ways of coloring them. The authors
propose to break these symmetries by imposing a way of assigning colors after finding a
large clique using an approximation algorithm (given that the problem is NP-complete).
On the other hand, similarly to us, orderings based on well-known search algorithms like
breadth-first search (BFS, Ulyantsev et al., 2015; Zakirzyanov et al., 2019) and depth-first
search (DFS, Ulyantsev et al., 2016) have also been proposed. State-merging approaches
to learning DFA have also used BFS to break symmetries (Lambeau et al., 2008). These
BFS-based methods are different from ours in that they do not need to define a comparison
criteria for sets of symbols since they are applied to DFA. Remember that the edges in a
DFA are labeled by a single symbol, whereas the edges in a subgoal automaton might be
labeled by formulas with more than one symbol. Besides, unlike previous works, we prove
that the assignment of state and edge indices given by our mechanism is unique.
    Given the successes of the use of symmetry breaking in SAT solving, the ASP community
has also produced some work on symmetry breaking. Drescher et al. (2011) propose sbass,
a system that detects symmetries in a ground ASP program through a reduction to a
graph automorphism problem. Then, it adds constraints to the initial program to break
the detected symmetries.
    Codish et al. (2019) propose a method that breaks symmetries in undirected graphs by
imposing a lexicographical order in the rows of the adjacency matrix.
    In our previous work (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2020), we introduced a method for breaking
symmetries in acyclic subgoal automata, which consists in:

  1. assigning an integer index to each automaton state such that u0 has the lowest index
     and uA and uR have the highest indices; and

  2. imposing that a trace must visit automaton states in increasing order of indices.

                                           1086
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




However, this method cannot break symmetries when there is not a trace that traverses all
states in the automaton (e.g., if there are two different paths to the accepting state). We
illustrate this drawback with the example below.

Example 9.1. Figure 3 (p. 1050) showed two automata whose states u1 , u2 and u3 can
be used interchangeably if no symmetry breaking is used. If we assign indices 0, . . . , 3 to
states u0 , . . . , u3 and apply the symmetry breaking rule in (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2020), the
learned automaton for OfficeWorld’s VisitABCD task will always be the one showed
in Figure 3a. On the other hand, the automaton states u1 and u2 in Figure 3b can still be
switched since there is no trace that traverses both of them.

   The method presented in this paper does not depend on the sequence of states visited
by the traces. Therefore, it can break both symmetries given in the example above.

10. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have proposed ISA, a method that interleaves the learning and exploitation
of an automaton whose edges encode the subgoals of an episodic goal-oriented task. The
subgoals are expressed as propositional logic formulas over a set of high-level events that
the agent observes when interacting with the environment. These automata are represented
using a logic programming language and learned with a state-of-the-art inductive logic
programming system from traces of high-level events observed by the agent. Importantly,
we have devised a symmetry breaking mechanism that speeds up the automaton learning
phase by avoiding to revisit equivalent solutions in the hypothesis space. Besides, the
interleaving mechanism we propose ensures that the learned automata are minimal (i.e.,
have the fewest number of states). We have experimentally tested ISA with different types
of tasks, showing that it is capable of learning automata that can be exploited by existing
reinforcement learning techniques. We have also shown how automaton learning affects
reinforcement learning and vice versa, and that ISA achieves a performance comparable to
the setting where the automaton is handcrafted and given beforehand.
    We now discuss possible improvements to our algorithm and directions for future work.
Learning from Positive and Negative Examples. ISA aims to learn a minimal sub-
goal automaton from positive examples only (i.e., traces that the agent can observe), which
can lead to overgeneralization (Angluin, 1980). More specifically, in our case, the learned
automaton will be too general in tasks where there is a temporal dependency between the
observables (e.g., an observable o can only be observed if another observable o0 has been
observed before). Previously, we also showed that overgeneral automata might be learned
when key traces to learn all subgoals cannot be observed (see Figure 4, p. 1064).32

Example 10.1. Imagine that the set of observables O for the OfficeWorld environment
includes an observable g that states whether the task’s goal has been achieved. In the case of
the Coffee task, g is observed after the agent has been in the coffee location K and then in
the office location o; thus, a possible goal trace is h{K}, {}, {o, g}i. The automaton learner
could then output the automaton below.
32. Remember that we addressed this issue by learning an automaton that generalizes to a set of POMDPs.


                                                 1087
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                                   g
                                 start     u0           uA


This automaton is minimal and there is no other positive example that contradicts it because
g is only observed when the goal is reached.
     To avoid overgeneralization, we need traces that are impossible to observe from the
agent-environment interaction. These traces would constitute the set of negative examples,
which are supported by ILASP, the system we have used to learn the automata. For instance,
the trace h{g}i would be a negative example for the task described in Example 10.1. Since
it is impossible to observe such traces, the agent must be able to learn or hypothesize what
is unfeasible in the environment.
     To discover negative examples, our method would need to determine whether a given
trace is feasible or not. We hypothesize that approaches which learn the POMDP’s model
(that is, the transition probability function) would be useful to solve the problem along
with more sophisticated exploration strategies than -greedy.
Observable Discovery. ISA assumes that an appropriate set of observables is given in
advance. The same occurs with other methods that learn automaton structures, like reward
machines (Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020). Discovering the set of observables
from interaction is an important task towards automating the entire automaton learning
process. Possible future work could extract observables from object keypoints in images
(Kulkarni et al., 2019) or represent the abstract states from an abstracted state space using
observables.
Improve Scalability. Learning a minimal automaton from examples is a well-known
hard problem (Gold, 1978). The main factors that affect the scalability of our approach
are the number of states, whether cycles are allowed, the observable set size, the length of
the counterexample traces, and the maximum number of edges between two states. Even
though we have introduced some methods for improving scalability (symmetry breaking
and trace compression), there are several interesting directions for future work:
   • Other trace compression methods. It has been shown that shorter traces make learning
     faster. More sophisticated compression techniques than the one we have presented (see
     Appendix C.1) could be considered. However, compression can make the learning of
     certain automata unfeasible. Thus, the assumptions on the environments and target
     automata must be clearly stated.

   • Hierarchies of automata. While learning complex automata can take some time with
     the current approach, learning small automata does not take long. Therefore, we can
     think of hierarchies of small automata that invoke each other. Furthermore, once a
     small automaton has been learned in one task, it might be reusable in another task.

   • Revision of traces. Some of the collected counterexamples during learning can be
     long and/or contain many observables which are irrelevant to the task at hand (e.g.,
     observing B in OfficeWorld’s Coffee task). Thus, if at some point in the learning
     we realize that a counterexample is no longer needed because it is subsumed by a
     simpler one (i.e., shorter and without irrelevant observables), then we can replace it.

                                            1088
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




   • Other automaton learning methods. The L* algorithm (Angluin, 1987) is a query
     learning algorithm that can learn a DFA from just a polynomial number of membership
     and equivalence queries made to an oracle. One of the main criticisms of this paradigm
     is that it does not adapt to practical situations where there is not an oracle. However,
     there is recent work where Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are used to play the
     role of the oracle (Weiss et al., 2018). Michalenko et al. (2019) have shown that there
     is a close relationship between the internal representations used by RNNs and finite
     state automata. Therefore, we can consider using this family of methods in the future.

More Expressive Automata. A natural extension of this work is to learn automata
whose edges are labeled by first-order logic formulas instead of propositional logic formulas.
This would allow to enable features not currently supported by subgoal automata, such
as counting (without using an arbitrary number of edges). The ILASP system can learn
first-order logic rules.


Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and
suggestions. Anders Jonsson is partially supported by the Spanish grants PCIN-2017-082
and PID2019-108141GB-I00.

Appendix A. Proof of Proposition 4.1
To prove Proposition 4.1, we use the following result due to Gelfond and Lifschitz (1988):

Theorem A.1. If an ASP program P is stratified, then it has a unique answer set.

    Now, we give the definition of a stratified ASP program and proceed to prove Proposi-
tion 4.1.

Definition A.1. An ASP program P is stratified when there is a partition

                  P = P0 ∪ P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn                   (Pi and Pj disjoint for all i 6= j)

such that, for every predicate p

   • the definition of p (all clauses with p in the head) is contained in one of the partitions
     Pi

and, for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n:

   • S
     if a predicate occurs positively in a clause of Pi then its definition is contained within
        j≤i Pj .

   • if
     S a predicate occurs negatively in a clause of Pi then its definition is contained within
        j<i Pj .




                                             1089
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Proposition 4.1 (Correctness of the ASP encoding). Given a finite observation trace λ∗L,O ,
where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, and an automaton A that is valid with respect to λ∗L,O , the program
P = M (A) ∪ R ∪ M (λ∗L,O ) has a unique answer set AS and (1) accept ∈ AS if and only
if ∗ = G, and (2) reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D.

Proof. First, we prove that the program P = M (A) ∪ R ∪ M (λ∗L,O ) has a unique answer set.
By Theorem A.1, if P is stratified then it has a unique answer set. Therefore, we show there
is a possible way of partitioning P following the constraints in Definition A.1. A possible
partition is P = P0 ∪ P1 ∪ P2 ∪ P3 , where:

                  P0 = M (λ∗L,O ), P1 = M (A), P2 = Rϕ , P3 = Rδ ∪ Rst .

Remember that R = Rϕ ∪ Rδ ∪ Rst . The unique answer set is AS = AS0 ∪ AS1 ∪ AS2 ∪ AS3 ,
where ASi corresponds to partition Pi :

     AS0 = obs(o, t). | o ∈ λ∗L,O [t], 0 ≤ t ≤ n ∪ {step(t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n} ∪ {last(n).} ,
          



           {state(u). | u ∈ U } ∪
     AS1 = {ed(u,
           n      u0 , i). | u, u0 ∈ U, 1 ≤ i ≤ |ϕ(u, u0 )|} ∪                               o,
            ϕ̄(u, u0 , i, t). | u, u0 ∈ U, conji ∈ ϕ(u, u0 ), 0 ≤ t ≤ n, λ∗L,O [t] 6|= conji

           n                                                                              o
            ϕ(u, u0 , i, t). | u, u0 ∈ U, conji ∈ ϕ(u, u0 ), 0 ≤ t ≤ n, λ∗L,O [t] |= conji ∪
     AS2 = n                                                                          o     ,
            out-ϕ(u, t). | u ∈ U, 0 ≤ t ≤ n, ∃u0 ∈ U s.t. λ∗L,O [t] |= ϕ(u, u0 )

             n                                                            o
              δ(u, u0 , t). | u, u0 ∈ U, 0 ≤ t ≤ n, λ∗L,O [t] |= ϕ(u, u0 ) ∪
             n                                                                   o
              δ(u, u, t). | u ∈ U, 0 ≤ t ≤ n, @u0 ∈ U s.t. λ∗L,O [t] |= ϕ(u, u0 ) ∪
           {st(0, u0 ).} ∪
     AS3 = n                                           o                                .
            st(t, u). | 1 ≤ t ≤ n + 1, u = A(λ∗L,O )[t] ∪
           n                                o
            accept. | A(λ∗L,O )[n + 1] = uA ∪
           n                                o
            reject. | A(λ∗L,O )[n + 1] = uR


    We now prove that accept ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = G (i.e., the trace achieves the goal).
If ∗ = G then, since the automaton is valid with respect to λ∗L,O (see Definition 3.5), the
automaton traversal A(λ∗L,O ) finishes in the accepting state uA ; that is, A(λ∗L,O )[n+1] = uA .
This holds if and only if accept ∈ AS.
    The proof showing that reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D (i.e., the trace reaches a
dead-end) is similar to the previous one. If ∗ = D then, since the automaton is valid with
respect to λ∗L,O , the automaton traversal A(λ∗L,O ) finishes in the rejecting state uR ; that is,
A(λ∗L,O )[n + 1] = uR . This holds if and only if reject ∈ AS.

                                                  1090
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Appendix B. Symmetry Breaking Encodings
In this section we describe the details of our symmetry breaking mechanism. For ease of
presentation, we first encode it in the form of a satisfiability (SAT) formula and formally
prove several of its properties. We later explain how to convert this SAT formula into
ASP rules. Finally, we propose a more efficient ASP encoding of the symmetry breaking
constraints than the direct translation from SAT.

B.1 SAT Encoding
Our idea is to define a SAT formula that encodes a BFS traversal I(G) = hf, {Γu }u∈V i of
a given graph G = (V, E) in the class G, defined on a set of labels L = {l1 , . . . , lk }. Since
a graph indexing I(G) assigns unique integers to nodes and edges, we use i to refer to a
node u such that f (u) = i, (i, e) or (i, e, L) to refer to an edge (u, v, L) such that f (u) = i
and Γu (L) = e, and m to refer to a label lm ∈ L. We sometimes extend this notation in the
natural way, e.g. by writing Γi (L), E o (i) and ΠI (i).
Variables. We first define a set X of propositional SAT variables for all combinations of
symbols (sometimes with restrictions as indicated):

 1. ed(i, j, e),               [edge (i, e) ends in node j]
 2. label(i, e, m),            [the label set on edge (i, e) includes lm ∈ L]
 3. pa(i, j),           i < j, [node i is the parent of j in the BFS subtree]
 4. sm(i, j, e),        i < j, [e is the smallest integer on a BFS edge from node i to j]
 5. lt(i, e − 1, e, m), e > 1, [there is a label lm0 |m0 ≤m on (i, e) and not on (i, e − 1)]
Intuitively, variables ed(i, j, e) and label(i, e, m) are used to encode a graph G together with
an associated graph indexing I(G), variables pa(i, j) and sm(i, j, e) are used to encode the
parent function ΠI , and variables lt(i, e − 1, e, m) are used to encode the label set ordering.
Clauses. We next define a set C of clauses on X for all combinations of symbols (some-
times with restrictions as indicated). The first set of clauses (1-8) enforces the first condition
in Definition 6.2: for any two nodes i > 1 and j > 1, ΠI (i) < ΠI (j) ⇔ i < j.
     W
  1. i|i<j pa(i, j),                 j > 1,             [node j > 1 has incoming BFS edge]
  2. pa(i, j) ⇒ W¬pa(i0 , j),        i < i0 < j,        [incoming BFS edge is unique]
  3. pa(i, j) ⇒ e sm(i, j, e), i < j,                   [BFS edge implies smallest integer]
  4. pa(i, j) ⇒ ¬ed(i0 , j 0 , e),   i0 < i < j ≤ j 0 , [respect BFS order]
  5. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ pa(i, j),         i < j,             [smallest integer implies BFS edge]
                                   0
  6. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬sm(i, j, e ), i < j, e < e , 0      [smallest integer is unique]
  7. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ed(i, j, e),      i < j,             [smallest integer implies edge]
                               0   0           0   0
  8. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬ed(i, j , e ), i < j ≤ j , e < e, [correctly break ties]
Intuitively, Clauses 1 and 2 state that each node j > 1 has a unique parent node i in the
BFS subtree. Clauses 3, 5 and 6 state that each node j > 1 has a unique incoming edge
(i, e) with smallest integer e from its parent i in the BFS subtree. Clause 7 ensures that the
incoming edge (i, e) to j in the BFS subtree corresponds to an actual edge in the graph G.
     Clauses 4 and 8 constitute the core of symmetry breaking by enforcing the condition
that ΠI (i) < ΠI (j) should imply i < j. By definition of ΠI , the incoming edge (i, e) to j

                                              1091
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




in the BFS subtree should be the lexicographically smallest such integer pair. Hence the
graph G cannot contain any incoming edge (i0 , e0 ) to j from a node i0 < i. In addition,
no node j 0 > j can have such an incoming edge either, since otherwise its parent function
would be smaller than that of j, thus violating the desired condition. These two facts are
jointly encoded in Clause 4 by enforcing the restriction j 0 ≥ j.
    Likewise, if (i, e) is the incoming edge to j in the BFS subtree, graph G cannot contain
an incoming edge (i, e0 ) from the same node i with e0 < e. Again, no node j 0 > j can have
such an incoming edge either, since otherwise its parent function would be smaller than that
of j. These two facts are jointly encoded in Clause 8 by enforcing the restriction j 0 ≥ j.
    The second set of clauses (9-14) assigns edge integers to the outgoing edges from each
node, enforcing the second condition in Definition 6.2: for each node i and pair of outgo-
ing edges (i, e, L) and (i, e0 , L0 ), L < L0 ⇔ e < e0 . Due to the transitivity of the relation
<, it is sufficient to check that the condition holds for all pairs of consecutive edge inte-
gers (e − 1, e). Clauses 9 and 10 enforce that edge integers are unique between 1 and |E o (i)|.

 9. ed(i, j, e) ⇒ j 0 ed(i, j 0 , e − 1), e > 1, [edge integers start at 1 and are contiguous]
                    W

 10. ed(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬ed(i, j 0 , e),       j < j 0 , [edge integers cannot be duplicated]
Clauses 11-14 are used to enforce that two consecutive edges (i, e − 1, L) and (i, e, L0 ) satisfy
L < L0 . Formally, variable lt(i, e − 1, e, m) is only true if there exists m0 ≤ m such that
    / L and lm0 ∈ L0 . This is implemented using the following two clauses:
lm0 ∈

 11. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ⇒ ¬label(i, e − 1, m) ∨ lt(i, e − 1, e, m − 1), e > 1,
 12. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ⇒ label(i, e, m) ∨ lt(i, e − 1, e, m − 1),      e > 1.
                                             / L and lm ∈ L0 , or lt(i, e − 1, e, m − 1) holds for
Hence if lt(i, e − 1, e, m) holds, either lm ∈
m − 1. The disjuncts mentioning m − 1 are only evaluated when m > 1. The next clause en-
sures that for each edge (i, e) with e > 1, lt(i, e−1, e, m) is true for at least one label lm ∈ L:
                     W
 13. ed(i, j, e) ⇒       m lt(i, e − 1, e, m),   e > 1.

Finally, the following clause encodes the second part of Definition 6.1, ensuring that the
label set on edge (i, e) is not lower than that on (i, e − 1):

 14. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ∨ ¬label(i, e − 1, m) ∨ label(i, e, m), e > 1.


Properties. We proceed to prove several properties about the SAT encoding. Concretely,
we show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the BFS traversal of a graph
and a solution to the SAT encoding.

Definition B.1. Given a graph G = (V, E) ∈ G defined on a set of labels L = {l1 , . . . , lk }
and an associated graph indexing I(G) = hf, {Γu }u∈V i, let X(G, I) be an assignment to the
SAT variables in X , assigning false to all variables in X except as follows:

   • For each edge (u, v, L) ∈ E, ed(f (u), f (v), Γu (L)) is true.

   • For each edge (u, v, L) ∈ E and each label lm ∈ L, label(f (u), Γu (L), m) is true.

                                                     1092
               Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




   • For each node v ∈ V \ {v1 } with ΠI (v) = (i, e), pa(i, f (v)) and sm(i, f (v), e) are true.

   • For each node u ∈ V , each pair of outgoing edges (u, v, L) and (u, v 0 , L0 ) in E o (u)
     such that Γu (L) = Γu (L0 ) − 1, and each label lm ∈ L, lt(f (u), Γu (L), Γu (L0 ), m) is true
     if there exists m0 ≤ m such that lm0 ∈ / L and lm0 ∈ L0 .


Example B.1. Given the graph G, graph indexing I(G) and set of labels L = {a, b, c, d, e, f }
from Example 6.4 (p. 1052), the assignment X(G, I) assigns true to the following SAT
variables in X :
                                                                                                   
   
    ed(1, 2, 1)    label(1, 1, 2) label(1, 1, 5) ed(1, 3, 2)       label(1, 2, 1) label(1, 2, 6)  
   
   
   
    ed(1,  4, 3)   label(1,  3, 1) label(1,  3, 2) ed(2,  4, 1)    label(2,  1, 1)                 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
   
   
   
    ed(3,  4, 1)   label(3,  1, 2) ed(4,  5, 1)    label(4,  1, 4) ed(4,  5, 2)    label(4,  2, 3) 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
     pa(1, 2)       pa(1, 3)        pa(1, 4)        pa(4, 5)
                                                                                                   
   
    sm(1, 2, 1) sm(1, 3, 2)        sm(1, 4, 3)     sm(4, 5, 1)                                     
                                                                                                    
     lt(1, 1, 2, 1) lt(1, 1, 2, 2)  lt(1, 1, 2, 3)  lt(1, 1, 2, 4)  lt(1, 1, 2, 5)  lt(1, 1, 2, 6)
   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
     lt(1, 2, 3, 2) lt(1, 2, 3, 3)  lt(1, 2, 3, 4)  lt(1, 2, 3, 5)  lt(1, 2, 3, 6)
   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
     lt(4, 1, 2, 3) lt(4, 1, 2, 4) lt(4, 1, 2, 5) lt(4, 1, 2, 6)

Theorem B.1. Given a graph G and a graph indexing I(G), the assignment X(G, I) to
the SAT variables in X satisfies all SAT clauses in C if and only if I(G) is a BFS traversal.

Proof. ⇐: Assume that I(G) is a BFS traversal (i.e., it satisfies the conditions of Defini-
tion 6.2, p. 1052). We show that each clause in C is satisfied:
      W
   1. i|i<j pa(i, j) holds for v such that f (v) = j > 1 since pa(i, j) is true for ΠI (v) = (i, e).

   2. pa(i, j) ⇒ ¬pa(i0 , j) holds since pa(i, j) is true for a single i.
                  W
   3. pa(i, j) ⇒ e sm(i, j, e) holds for v such that f (v) = j since pa(i, j) and sm(i, j, e)
      are true for ΠI (v) = (i, e).

   4. pa(i, j) ⇒ ¬ed(i0 , j 0 , e) holds for v such that f (v) = j and i0 < i < j = j 0 since
      ΠI (v) = (i, e) is the lexicographically smallest integer pair on incoming edges to v,
      implying that G cannot contain an edge to v from a node u with f (u) = i0 < i.
      Moreover, since I(G) is a BFS traversal, we cannot have ΠI (w) < ΠI (v) for a node
      w with f (w) = j 0 > j, else the second condition in Definition 6.2 is violated. Hence
      G cannot contain an edge to w from a node u with f (u) = i0 < i, so the clause also
      holds for i0 < i < j < j 0 .

   5. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ pa(i, j) holds for v such that f (v) = j since pa(i, j) and sm(i, j, e) are
      true for ΠI (v) = (i, e).

   6. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬sm(i, j, e0 ) holds since sm(i, j, e) is true for a single i and e.

   7. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ed(i, j, e) holds for v such that f (v) = j since ΠI (v) = (i, e) implies that
      there exists an edge (u, v, L) ∈ E with f (u) = i and Γu (L) = e.

                                                1093
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




   8. sm(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬ed(i, j 0 , e0 ) holds for v such that f (v) = j and j = j 0 since ΠI (v) = (i, e)
      is the lexicographically smallest integer pair on incoming edges to v, implying that
      G cannot contain an edge (u, v, L) with f (u) = i and Γu (L) < e. For j < j 0 , the
      parent function of the node w with f (w) = j 0 cannot be smaller than that of v, else
      the second condition in Definition 6.2 is violated. Hence G cannot contain an edge
      (u, w, L) with f (u) = i and Γu (L) < e. Thus the clause also holds for the case j < j 0 .

   9. ed(i, j, e) ⇒ j 0 ed(i, j 0 , e − 1) holds for u with f (u) = i since Γu is a bijection onto
                         W
      {1, . . . , |E o (u)|}.

 10. ed(i, j, e) ⇒ ¬ed(i, j 0 , e) holds for u with f (u) = i since Γu is a bijection.

 11. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ⇒ ¬label(i, e − 1, m) ∨ lt(i, e − 1, e, m − 1) holds for u, f (u) = i, and
     outgoing edges (u, v, L), (u, v 0 , L0 ) with Γu (L) = e−1 = Γu (L0 )−1 since lt(i, e−1, e, m)
     implies that either lm ∈/ L or there exists m0 < m such that lm0 ∈     / L and lm0 ∈ L0 .

 12. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ⇒ label(i, e, m) ∨ lt(i, e − 1, e, m − 1) holds for the same setting since
     lt(i, e − 1, e, m) implies that either lm ∈ L0 or there exists m0 < m such that lm0 ∈     /L
     and lm0 ∈ L .  0


 13. ed(i, j, e) ⇒ j 0 ed(i, j 0 , e − 1) holds since I(G) is a BFS traversal, implying that the
                      W
     bijection Γu for u with f (u) = i satisfies L < L0 whenever Γu (L) < Γu (L0 ) (and in
     particular when Γu (L) = e − 1 = Γu (L0 ) − 1). Since L < L0 , there has to exist at least
     one m, 1 ≤ m ≤ k such that lm ∈       / L and lm ∈ L0 due to Definition 6.1.

 14. lt(i, e − 1, e, m) ∨ ¬label(i, e − 1, m) ∨ label(i, e, m) also holds since Γu (L) = e − 1 =
     Γu (L0 ) − 1 implies L < L0 . Hence for the given m, Definition 6.1 is satisfied either
     1) by a label lm0 ≤m , implying that lt(i, e − 1, e, m) is true; or 2) by a label lm0 >m ,
     implying that lm ∈ L and lm ∈     / L0 cannot both be true.

⇒: Assume that X(G, I) satisfies all SAT clauses. We show that I(G) is a BFS traversal.
First note from above that X(G, I) satisfies all clauses except 4, 8, 13 and 14 even if I(G)
is not a BFS traversal. Hence we can focus exclusively on these four clauses.
     We first analyze Clauses 13 and 14. For Clause 13 to be true, any edge (i, e) induced
from graph G with e > 1 has to satisfy lt(i, e − 1, e, m) for at least one label lm ∈ L. Let u
be the node with f (u) = i and let (u, v, L) and (u, v 0 , L0 ) be the two outgoing edges in E o (u)
such that Γu (L) = e − 1 = Γu (L0 ) − 1. By definition of X(G, I) there exists m, 1 ≤ m ≤ k
such that lm ∈  / L and lm ∈ L0 . For the smallest such m there cannot exist m0 < m such
that lm0 ∈ L and lm0 ∈   / L0 , else Clause 14 would be violated for m0 . Hence Definition 6.1
holds for label lm , implying L < L0 .
     We next analyze Clauses 4 and 8. Let u be the node such that f (u) = j and ΠI (u) =
(i, e), and let v be any node such that f (v) = j 0 > j. Since Clause 4 holds, graph G cannot
contain an edge (w, v, L) such that f (w) = i0 < i. Since Clause 8 holds, graph G cannot
contain an edge (w, v, L) such that f (w) = i and Γw (L) < e. Since ΠI (v) cannot equal
(i, e), it has to be larger than (i, e), implying ΠI (u) < ΠI (v).
     We have shown that the two conditions in Definition 6.2 hold: for each pair of nodes u
and v in V \ {v1 }, ΠI (u) < ΠI (v) implies f (u) < f (v), and for each node u ∈ V and pair

                                                 1094
                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




of outgoing edges (u, v, L) and (u, v 0 , L0 ) in E o (u), L < L0 implies Γu (L) < Γu (L0 ). Hence
by definition I(G) is a BFS traversal.

Definition B.2. Let X be an assignment to the SAT variables X that satisfies the SAT
clauses in C. Given an edge (i, e), let L(i, e) = {lm | label(i, e, m)} be the label set induced by
X. We define a mapping G(X) = (G, I(G)) from X to a graph G = (V, E) and associated
graph indexing I(G) = hf, {Γu }u∈V i as follows:

   • The set of nodes is V = {v1 , . . . , vn }, where n is the largest node index in the assign-
     ment, and f (vi ) = i for each vi ∈ V .

   • The set of edges is E = {(vi , vj , L(i, e)) | ed(i, j, e)} and Γvi (L(i, e)) = e.

   • The parent function of each vj ∈ V equals ΠI (vj ) = (i, e) if sm(i, j, e) is true.

Theorem B.2. Given an assignment X to the SAT variables X that satisfies all clauses
in C, the mapping G(X) = (G, I(G)) induces a graph G in the class G and a well-defined
graph indexing I(G).

Proof. We first show that the induced graph indexing I(G) is well-defined. Clearly f
is a bijection onto {1, . . . , |V |} by definition. We next show that Γvi is a bijection onto
{1, . . . , |E o (vi )|} for each node vi ∈ V . Clause 10 ensures that ed(i, j, e) and ed(i, j 0 , e)
cannot be true simultaneously for j 6= j 0 . Due to Clause 9, if edge (i, e) is defined for e > 1,
then so is (i, e−1). Applying this argument recursively implies that (i, e) is uniquely defined
for e ∈ {1, . . . , |E o (vi )|}, where |E o (vi )| is the largest integer of an outgoing edge from i.
      We next show that the induced label set L(i, e) on each outgoing edge (i, e) from i is
unique. Clause 13 implies that for each edge (i, e) with e > 1, lt(i, e − 1, e, m) is true for at
least one label lm ∈ L. Clauses 11 and 12 ensure that lt(i, e − 1, e, m) is true only if there
exists m0 ≤ m such that ¬label(i, e−1, m0 ) and label(i, e, m0 ) are true. For the smallest such
m0 there cannot exist m00 < m0 such that label(i, e−1, m00 ) and ¬label(i, e, m00 ) are true, else
Clause 14 would be violated for m00 . Hence label lm satisfies the condition in Definition 6.1
with respect to the induced label sets L(i, e − 1) and L(i, e), implying L(i, e − 1) < L(i, e).
      In conclusion, we have shown that (i, e) is uniquely defined for e ∈ {1, . . . , |E o (vi )|},
and that L(i, e − 1) < L(i, e) holds for each pair of consecutive integers in {1, . . . , |E o (vi )|}.
Since Γvi is defined as Γvi (L(i, e)) = e for each e ∈ {1, . . . , |E o (vi )|}, this implies that Γvi is
a well-defined bijection from E o (vi ) to {1, . . . , |E o (vi )|}.
      We also need to show that the induced parent function ΠI is well-defined, i.e. that for
each j > 1, sm(i, j, e) is true for a single i and e, and that ΠI (vj ) = (i, e) is consistent with
the definition of ΠI . Clauses 1 and 2 imply that pa(i, j) is true for a single i. Clauses 3,
5 and 6 imply that sm(i, j, e) can only be true for the same i and j as pa(i, j), and that
sm(i, j, e) is true for a single e. For ΠI (vj ) = (i, e) to hold, G has to contain the edge
(vi , vj , L(i, e)), which is guaranteed by Clause 7. Moreover, G cannot contain any edge
(vi0 , vj , L(i0 , e0 )) such that (i0 , e0 ) < (i, e), which is guaranteed by Clauses 4 and 8.
      We finally show that the induced graph G belongs to the class G, i.e. that the three
assumptions on page 1050 are satisfied. We satisfy Assumption 1 by designating v1 as the
start node. We have already shown above that the induced label set L(i, e) on each outgoing
edge (i, e) from i is unique, satisfying Assumption 3. It remains to show that Assumption 2

                                                  1095
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




holds, i.e. that each node vj , j > 1, is reachable from v1 . Since sm(i, j, e) is true for a
single i and e such that i < j, G has to contain the edge (vi , vj , L(i, e)) due to Clause 7.
Aggregating these incoming edges for all nodes different from v1 results in a BFS subtree
rooted in v1 , and each node vj , j > 1, is reachable from v1 in this subtree.

    By combining Theorems B.1 and B.2, it follows that the mapping G(X) = (G, I(G)) of
a satisfying assignment X to the SAT clauses in C is such that I(G) is a BFS traversal.
Since by Lemma 6.1 (p. 1053) each graph G ∈ G has a unique BFS traversal, it follows that
the SAT encoding cannot generate two permutations of node integers that represent the
same graph G. Hence the SAT encoding breaks the symmetries in graphs such as those in
Figure 3 (p. 1050).
    We remark that the SAT encoding is not forced to include edges in the induced graph
G other than those needed to correctly represent the parent function ΠI . However, by
combining the SAT encoding with another encoding for generating automata, we ensure
that the encoding cannot produce two symmetric automata.

B.2 ASP Encodings
In this section we present two different encodings of our symmetry breaking method in
ASP for its application to subgoal automata. The first method (Appendix B.2.1) is a direct
translation from the SAT clauses introduced in the previous section. However, there are
certain aspects that can be made more efficient in ASP, so we propose a second method for
encoding the symmetry breaking constraints (Appendix B.2.2).
    In order to apply the proposed symmetry breaking mechanism to a subgoal automaton,
we have to take the following aspects into account:

   1. The edges of a subgoal automaton are labeled by propositional formulas over a set of
      observables O, whereas the edges of a labeled directed graph are defined over a set of
      labels L.

   2. The graph indexing presented for labeled directed graphs assigns a different edge index
      for each of the outgoing edges from a node. In contrast, in the ASP representation
      M (A) of a subgoal automaton A the edge indices are unique only from one state to
      another (i.e., can be repeated between other pairs of states).

    We now partially describe how we address (1), which is common to both methods. We
map the set of observables O used by the subgoal automaton into a set of labels L, which
consists of integer values for easy comparison. Each of these integer values must encode
either an observable or its negation. Given a set of observables O = {o1 , . . . , o|O| }, the set
of labels L is defined as:
                                  L = {i, i + |O| | oi ∈ O} ,
where i corresponds to oi and i + |O| corresponds to its negation, ¬oi . Therefore, L consists
of integers from 1 to 2|O| where labels 1 . . . |O| correspond to each of the observables, and
labels |O| + 1 . . . 2|O| correspond to the observable negations. This mapping is encoded in
ASP using the following predicates:

   • obs id(o, i) indicates that observable o ∈ O is assigned id i.

                                              1096
                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




    • num obs(i) indicates that the set of observables has size i.

    • valid label(l) indicates that l is a label.

We simply ground the above predicates according to their descriptions:

       {obs id(oi , i). | oi ∈ O} ∪ {num obs(|O|).} ∪ {valid label(l). | 1 ≤ l ≤ 2|O|)} .

The mapping is not complete: we need to map the formulas on the edges into sets of labels.
Specifically, we map the factual representation of the automaton introduced in Section 6 into
label facts similar to the variables of the same name used in the SAT encoding. However,
these facts are slightly different between encodings, so we describe them in detail in their
respective sections. The second aspect commented above is also addressed differently for
each encoding.
    Another common feature between the encodings is that states in the automaton are
assigned an integer index for easy comparison. This is needed only for the rules enforcing
the BFS traversal on the automaton, which corresponds to Clauses 1-8 in the SAT encoding.
The predicate state id(u, i) denotes that the automaton state u has index i and its ground
instances are:
                            {state id(ui , i). | ui ∈ U \ {uA , uR }} .
Note that, without loss of generality, the first state index is 0 (because of the initial state
u0 )33 and that not all states are assigned an index. Given that the accepting state uA
and the rejecting state uR are fixed, they cannot be interchanged with any other state.
Furthermore, they cannot be the parent of any other state since they are absorbing states.
Thus, they are excluded from the BFS ordering. In order to easily compare the indices
of two states, we introduce the set of rules below. The first rule defines the predicate
state lt(u, u0 ) to express that the index of state u is lower than that of u0 . Similarly, the
second rule defines the predicate state leq(u, u0 ) to express that the index of state u is
lower or equal than that of u0 .
                                                                                 
             state lt(X, Y) : - state id(X, XID), state id(Y, YID), XID<YID.
             state leq(X, Y) : - state id(X, XID), state id(Y, YID), XID<=YID.

B.2.1 SAT-Based Encoding
The encoding we present in this section is a direct translation from the SAT encoding
introduced in Appendix B.1. The presentation of this encoding is divided into three parts.
First, we introduce a mapping from the edge indices used by the subgoal automata into
the edge indices used in the symmetry breaking method. Second, we describe how the
previously introduced mapping from observables into labels is applied to map formulas over
observables into label sets. Third, we transform the SAT clauses into ASP rules.
Edge Index Mapping. The set of rules below encodes the edge index mapping. Firstly,
we define a predicate edge id(i), where i is an edge index, and ground it for values between
1 and (|U | − 1)κ:
                            {edge id(i) | 1 ≤ i ≤ (|U | − 1)κ} .
33. Remember that in Section 6.2 the bijection f assigns indices starting from 1.


                                                   1097
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Note that (|U | − 1)κ is the maximum number of outgoing edges from a state: each state
can have edges to |U | − 1 different states and κ edges are allowed from one state to another.
    We use facts of the form mapping(u, v, e, e0 ) to indicate that edge e between u and v
is mapped into e0 . The mapping is enforced using the set of rules below. The first rule
describes that an edge index E from X to Y is mapped into exactly one edge index EE in the
range given by the edge id facts. The second rule enforces that two outgoing edges from
a state X to two different states Y and Z must be mapped into different edge indices. The
third rule enforces that two edge indices E and EP between the same pair of states X and Y
must be mapped into different edge indices. The fourth rule indicates that if there are two
edge indices E and EP between states X and Y such that E<EP, then the indices to which
they are mapped (EE and EEP) must preserve the same ordering (EE<EEP).
                                                                                           
 
 1{mapping(X, Y, E, EE) : edge id(EE)}1 : - ed(X, Y, E).                                   
                                                                                            
  : - mapping(X, Y, , EE), mapping(X, Z, , EE), Y<Z.
                                                                                           
 
 : - mapping(X, Y, E, EE), mapping(X, Y, EP, EE), E<EP.                                    
                                                                                            
  : - ed(X, Y, E), ed(X, Y, EP), E<EP, mapping(X, Y, E, EE), mapping(X, Y, EP, EEP), EE>EEP.
                                                                                           


   Given the mapping, it is straightforward to redefine the ed atoms, as well as the pos
and neg facts used in the factual representation of the automata introduced in Section 6:
                                                                               
                map ed(X, Y, EP) : - ed(X, Y, E), mapping(X, Y, E, EP).        
                 map pos(X, Y, EP, O) : - pos(X, Y, E, O), mapping(X, Y, E, EP).
                 map neg(X, Y, EP, O) : - neg(X, Y, E, O), mapping(X, Y, E, EP).
                                                                               

The predicates map ed, map pos and map neg are used in the ASP encoding of the symmetry
breaking constraints explained later.

Mapping of Formulas into Label Sets. The set of rules below uses the previously
described observable-to-label and edge index mappings to transform formulas over a set
of observables into label sets. The first rule sets OID as a label of edge E from X if the
corresponding observable O appears positively in that edge. The second rule sets OID+N as
a label of edge E from X if the corresponding observable O appears negatively in that edge
and N is the number of observables.
                                                                                   
             label(X, E, OID) : - map pos(X, Y, E, O), obs id(O, OID).
             label(X, E, OID+N) : - map neg(X, Y, E, O), obs id(O, OID), num obs(N).

Symmetry Breaking Rules. Similarly to the SAT encoding, we divide the resulting
ASP rules into three sets. First, we introduce the set of rules enforcing the indexing given
by the BFS traversal on the automaton. These rules are defined in terms of an auxiliary
predicate ed sb(u, u0 , i) equivalent to map ed(u, u0 , i) but only defined for those states u0
that have a state index. Remember that the accepting (uA ) and rejecting (uR ) states are
excluded from the traversal and, thus, they are the only states without an index. The
following rule defines ed sb in terms of map ed:

                       ed sb(X, Y, E) : - map ed(X, Y, E), state id(Y, ).

                                              1098
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




The set of rules below that corresponds to Clauses 1-8 in the SAT encoding.
                                                                                   
     
      1{pa(X, Y) : state(X), state lt(X, Y)} : - state(Y), state id(Y, YID), YID>0.
                                                                                    
     
     
     
      : - pa(X, Y), pa(XP, Y), state lt(X, XP), state lt(XP, Y).                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
     
     
     
      1{sm(X,   Y, E)  : edge id(E)}  : - pa(X, Y).                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
       : - pa(X, Y), ed sb(XP, YP, ), state lt(XP, X), state leq(Y, YP).
                                                                                   
     
      : - sm(X, Y, ), not pa(X, Y).                                                
                                                                                    
       : - sm(X, Y, E), sm(X, Y, EP), E<EP.
     
                                                                                   
                                                                                    
     
                                                                                   
                                                                                    
       : -
                                                                                   
     
     
          sm(X, Y, E), not  ed  sb(X, Y, E).                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                   
       : - sm(X, Y, E), ed sb(X, YP, EP), state lt(X, Y), state leq(Y, YP), EP<E.

   The next set of rules encodes Clauses 9 and 10, which enforce that edge indices are
unique between 1 and the number of outgoing edges from X:
                                                                     
                      : - map ed(X, Y, E), not map ed(X, , E−1), E>1.
                      : - map ed(X, Y, E), map ed(X, Z, E), Y<Z.

   The following rules encode SAT Clauses 11-14 in ASP. Note that Clauses 11 and 12 have
been divided into two rules respectively to cover the different values of L.
                                                                                         
    
     : - lt(X, E−1, E, L), label(X, E−1, L), not lt(X, E−1, E, L−1), E>1, L>1.           
                                                                                          
    
    
    
     : - lt(X, E−1, E, L), label(X, E−1, L), E>1,   L=1.                                 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
      : - lt(X, E−1, E, L), not label(X, E, L), not lt(X, E−1, E, L−1), E>1, L>1.
                                                                                         
    
     : - lt(X, E−1, E, L), not label(X, E, L), E>1, L=1.                                 
                                                                                          
                            :                  : -
                                                                                         
    
    
     1{lt(X,   E−1, E, L)    valid label(L)}      map ed(X, Y, E), E>1.                  
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
      : - not lt(X, E−1, E, L), label(X, E−1, L), not label(X, E, L), map ed(X, , E), E>1.
                                                                                         

B.2.2 Alternative Encoding
The encoding we describe in this section is an alternative to the one presented before.
Despite of the differences, it also enforces the graph indexing given by the BFS traversal
described in Section 6.
    Similarly to the SAT-based encoding, we need to address the fact that the mechanism
uses an indexing for the edges different from the one we use to represent a subgoal au-
tomaton. In the SAT-based approach, we defined a mapping from the edge indices used
by a subgoal automaton to those required by the symmetry breaking. In this approach, we
do not use such mapping and directly operate on the edge indices used by the automata.
The edge indexing used in the symmetry breaking is such that each outgoing edge from a
given state has a different index. In other words, each edge is uniquely identified by an
integer number. Here we preserve the same uniqueness principle by expressing the edges as
(u, (v, e)) meaning that there is an edge from u to v with edge index e. Note that the tuple
(v, e) uniquely identifies each outgoing edge from u.
    The rest of this section is divided into two parts. First, like in the SAT-based approach,
we map the propositional formulas on the edges into sets of labels. Then, we describe the
set of ASP rules we use for breaking symmetries.
Mapping of Formulas into Label Sets. We use the predicate label(u, (v, e), l) to
express that label l appears in the edge from state u to state v with index e. Similarly

                                            1099
                     Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




to the SAT-based encoding, the set of rules below transforms the formulas over a set of
observables into label sets. The first rule sets OID as a label of edge (Y, E) from X if the
corresponding observable O appears positively in that edge. Likewise, the second rule sets
OID+N as a label of edge (Y, E) from X if the corresponding observable O appears negatively
in that edge and N is the number of observables.
                                                                                     
              label(X, (Y, E), OID) : - pos(X, Y, E, O), obs id(O, OID).
              label(X, (Y, E), OID+N) : - neg(X, Y, E, O), obs id(O, OID), num obs(N).

Note that while the label predicate in the SAT encoding only used the edge index for
referring to an outgoing edge, here we use a state-edge pair as explained at the beginning
of the section.

Symmetry Breaking Rules. We start by describing the rules which enforce outgo-
ing edges from a given state to be ordered by their respective label sets. The predicate
ed lt(X, (Y, E), (YP, EP)) indicates that the edge from X to Y with edge index E is lower than
the edge from X to YP with edge index EP. The set of rules below describes how this ordering
is determined and what constraints we impose on it. The first rule determines that given
two outgoing edges from X, (Y, E) and (YP, EP), either (Y, E) is lower than (YP, EP) or vice
versa. Now, the order between outgoing edges from a state X must respect two constraints:

   • The second rule enforces transitivity. That is, if Edge1 is lower than Edge2, and Edge2
     is lower than Edge3, then Edge1 must be lower than Edge3.

   • The third rule enforces that two edges to the same state Y must be ordered according
     to their edge index. That is, given edges (Y, E) and (Y, EP) from X such that E<EP,
     edge (Y, E) must be lower than (Y, EP).

                                                                                             
   
   1{ed lt(X, (Y, E), (YP, EP)); ed lt(X, (YP, EP), (Y, E))}1 : - ed(X, Y, E), ed(X, YP, EP),
                                                                                              
                                                                    (Y, E)<(YP, EP).
   
                                                                                             
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
    : - ed lt(X, Edge1, Edge2), ed lt(X, Edge2, Edge3), not ed lt(X, Edge1, Edge3),
                                                                                             
   
   
       Edge1!=Edge3.                                                                         
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
    : - ed lt(X, (Y, E), (Y, EP)), ed(X, Y, E), ed(X, Y, EP), E>EP.
                                                                                             

Note that the previous set of rules guesses an ordering of outgoing edges from a given state.
However, this ordering must comply with that of the label sets given in Definition 6.1.
We use the predicate label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L) to indicate that there is label L0 ≤ L
that appears in Edge2 and does not appear in a lower edge Edge1, where both Edge1 and
Edge2 are outgoing edges from X. Note that this predicate encodes the first condition in
Definition 6.1 up to a specific label. The set of rules below prunes solutions where outgoing
edges do not follow the established label ordering criteria. The first rule indicates that
label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L) is true if Edge1 is lower than Edge2, and the label L does not
appear in Edge1 and appears in Edge2. The second rule states that label lt is true for a
valid label L+1 if it is true for L. The third rule states that if Edge1 is lower than Edge2,
then the label set on Edge1 must be lower than that on Edge2. Note that the three last

                                               1100
                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




literals on the constraint enforce both conditions in Definition 6.1.
                                                                                      
   
    label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L) : - ed lt(X, Edge1, Edge2), not label(X, Edge1, L),  
                                                                                       
                                      label(X, Edge2, L).
   
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
     label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L+1) : - label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L), valid label(L+1).
     : - ed lt(X, Edge1, Edge2), label(X, Edge1, L), not label(X, Edge2, L),
   
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
   
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
         not label lt(X, Edge1, Edge2, L).

    The set of rules below imposes that lower edge indices cannot be left unused. First,
we define a fact for each possible edge index between 1 and κ. Remember that κ is the
maximum number of edges from one state to another. Second, the constraint indicates that
if there is an edge from X to Y with edge index E where E>1, then there must be an edge
between the same states but with edge index E−1 as well.
                                                                          
                       edge id(1..κ).
                       : - ed(X, Y, E), not ed(X, Y, E−1), edge id(E), E>1.

   Finally, we introduce a set of rules for enforcing a BFS traversal of the subgoal automa-
ton. Firstly, like in the SAT-based approach, we use a predicate ed sb(X, Y, E) which is
ground for all the edges except for those directed to a state without an index (the accepting
and rejecting states):

                            ed sb(X, Y, E) : - ed(X, Y, E), state id(Y, ).

    We now introduce a predicate pa(X, Y) denoting that state X is the parent of Y in the
BFS subtree. Note that it is equivalent to the variable pa(i, j) from the SAT encoding. The
set of rules below uses this predicate to enforce the BFS ordering. The first rule defines
that state X is the parent of Y if there is an edge from X to Y, X has a lower index than Y,
and there is no state Z whose index is lower than X’s and has an edge to Y.34 The second
rule indicates that all states with an index except for the initial state must have a parent.
The third rule imposes the BFS ordering similarly to Clause 4 in the SAT encoding. Note
that the first two rules encode Clauses 1 and 2 of the SAT encoding.
                                                                                 
              
               pa(X, Y) : - ed sb(X, Y, ), state lt(X, Y),                       
                                                                                  
                             #false : ed sb(Z, Y, ), state lt(Z, X).
                                                                                 
              
               : - state id(Y, YID), YID>0, not pa( , Y).                        
                                                                                  
                : - pa(X, Y), ed sb(XP, YP, ), state lt(XP, X), state leq(Y, YP).
                                                                                 

    Now we need to enforce that the BFS children from a given state are correctly ordered;
that is, those children pointed by lower edges should be identified by lower state indices.
We use the state ord(X) predicate to indicate that state X is properly ordered with respect
to its siblings (i.e., other states with the same parent state). The set of rules below enforces
this ordering. The first rule defines that a state Y is correctly ordered with respect to its
siblings if the edge from their parent X to Y, (Y, E), is lower than the edge to another state
(YP, EP) if Y<YP. That is, the edges must be ordered according to the order of the state

34. Note that what follows #false : must not hold in order to make the body of the rule true.


                                                  1101
                      Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




indices. The second rule enforces that all states with a parent must be correctly ordered
with respect to their siblings.
                                                                                             
  state ord(Y) : - ed sb(X, Y, E), pa(X, Y),                                                 
                       #false : ed sb(X, YP, EP), state lt(Y, YP), ed lt(X, (YP, EP), (Y, E)).
    : - pa( , Y), not state ord(Y).
                                                                                             


Appendix C. Additional Experimental Details
In this section we describe the experimental details omitted in Section 8. Firstly, we ex-
plain how some of the restrictions used in the experiments are implemented. Secondly, we
make a thorough analysis of how enabling and disabling these restrictions (as well as other
parameters) affects automaton learning and reinforcement learning.

C.1 Automaton Learning Restrictions
In this section we provide details about the restrictions on automaton learning outlined
in Section 8.1. All the rules introduced below are added to the automaton learning task
defined in Sections 5 and 6.
Avoid Learning Purely Negative Formulas. This restriction consists in avoiding
that any edge is labeled by a formula formed only by negated observables. The following
constraint discards such solutions by enforcing an observable to occur positively whenever
an observable appears negatively in a given edge:35

                                : - neg(X, Y, E, ), not pos(X, Y, E, ).

Acyclicity. The following set of rules enforces the automaton to be acyclic; that is, two
automaton states cannot be reached from each other. The path(X, Y) predicate indicates
there is a directed path (i.e., a sequence of directed edges) from X to Y. The first rule states
that there is a path from X to Y if there is an edge from X to Y. The second rule indicates
that there is a path from X to Y if there is an edge from X to an intermediate state Z from
which there is a path to Y. Finally, the third rule rules out those answer sets where X and
Y can be reached from each other through directed edges.
                                                                    
                            path(X, Y) : - ed(X, Y, ).              
                               path(X, Y) : - ed(X, Z, ), path(Z, Y).
                               : - path(X, Y), path(Y, X).
                                                                    

Trace Compression. The method we propose for shortening an observation trace is
based on the following assumptions:
   1. Empty observations are irrelevant.

   2. Seeing the same observation twice or more in a row is equivalent to seeing it once.
Given these two assumptions, we define a subtype of observation trace called compressed
observation trace.
35. Remember that the pos and neg facts were introduced in Section 6.


                                                 1102
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Definition C.1 (Compressed observation trace). A compressed observation trace λ̂L,O =
hÔ0 , . . . , Ôm i is the result of removing empty observations and, thereafter, removing con-
tiguous equal observations from an observation trace λL,O = hO0 , . . . , On i.

Example C.1. The first trace below is a goal observation trace for the OfficeWorld’s
Coffee task. The second trace is the resulting compressed observation trace.

                             λG
                              L,O = h{}, {K}, {K}, {}, {}, {o}i ,

                             λ̂G
                               L,O = h{K}, {o}i .

    As we will see experimentally (see Appendix C.2), compressed observation traces are
helpful to speed up automaton learning. However, their applicability is limited to tasks
where the assumptions above hold. Thus, these traces should not be used to learn the
automata for tasks where every single observation is important, such as “observe K twice
in a row”.
    The automaton learning component of our method does not distinguish between ob-
servation traces and compressed observation traces. Therefore, we do not have to make
any change in the encoding of the learning tasks. However, since the information about the
number of performed steps is lost and there are no empty observations, unlabeled transitions
are meaningless when these traces are used. Thus, we rule out automata with unlabeled
edges using the following constraint when trace compression is enabled:

                     : - ed(X, Y, E), not pos(X, Y, E, ), not neg(X, Y, E, ).

This constraint rules out any inductive solution where an edge from X to Y with index E is
not labeled by a positive or a negative literal.
    In the case of the RL component, the use of compressed observation traces affects the way
in which an automaton is traversed by the agent. Since empty observations and contiguous
duplicated observations are ignored, the transition function δϕ is only queried when the
current observation (1) is not empty and (2) it is different from the last observation. If
these two conditions do not hold, the agent remains in the same automaton state.

C.2 Parameter Tuning Experiments
In this section we make a thorough analysis of the impact that the reinforcement learning
and automaton learning parameters have on the overall performance of ISA using the Of-
ficeWorld domain. Table 7 shows the parameters used throughout these experiments.
The parameter set at the top of the table remains unchanged for all experiments. In con-
trast, the parameters in the bottom part of the table can change between experiments.

C.2.1 POMDP Sets, Number of Tasks & Number of Steps per Episode
In these experiments we check the variability in the performance for two different sets
of randomly generated POMDPs, different numbers of POMDPs in a POMDP set, and
for different numbers of steps per episode. Let D1 = {MΣ                      Σ
                                                               1,1 , . . . , M1,100 } and D2 =
                                                           j
{MΣ                Σ                                                  Σ            Σ
    2,1 , . . . , M2,100 } be two sets of 100 POMDPs. Let Di = {Mi,1 , . . . , Mi,j } ⊆ Di de-
note the subset of the first j POMDPs from the i-th POMDP set, and N be the maximum

                                              1103
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                     Learning rate (α)                           0.1
                     Exploration rate ()                        0.1
                     Discount factor (γ)                         0.99
                     Number of episodes                          10,000
                     Avoid learning purely negative formulas     3
                     RL algorithm                                HRLG
                     Number of tasks (|D|)                       50
                     Maximum episode length (N )                 250
                     Trace compression                           3
                     Enforce acyclicity                          3
                     Number of disjuncts (κ)                     1
                     Use restricted observable set               7

Table 7: Parameters used in the OfficeWorld experiments. The top part of the table
         contains those parameters that remain unchanged, while the bottom part contains
         those that change across experiments.


episode length (i.e., the maximum number of steps within an episode). These experiments
are performed with j ∈ {10, 50, 100} and N ∈ {100, 250, 500}.
    Given the set of POMDPs D1 , Figure 10 shows the learning curves for the different
combinations of POMDP subsets and steps. Although all experiments were run for 10,000
episodes, the curves are just shown for some of them to clearly display the variances between
different values of N . We make the following observations:
   • The lowest maximum episode length (N = 100) works fine when a goal state is easy
     to achieve (i.e., the number of subgoals is low, like in Coffee). As the number of
     subgoals in the task increases, the maximum episode length needs to be increased to
     reach a task’s final goal. If N is not high enough, then there is only a low chance
     that the agent will observe the required counterexamples to refine an automaton.
     Remember that if the goal is not achieved at least once, the agent will not be able to
     exploit the knowledge given by an automaton since it will not learn any. For instance,
     in the case of VisitABCD, we observe that the learning curves barely converge when
     N = 100 because no automaton is learned. Even when the number of POMDPs is
     high (100), a goal trace to start automaton learning is only found in 9 out of 20 runs.
   • Small sets of POMDPs are sufficient to learn an automaton and policies that achieve
     the goal in the Coffee task. However, in the tasks involving more subgoals, a small
     set of POMDPs (10) does not speed up convergence as much as bigger sets of POMDPs
     (50 or 100). For example, in VisitABCD, automata are rarely learned when the
     number of POMDPs is 10 for any maximum episode length. Increasing the number
     of POMDPs increases the chance that easier grids are included in the set and, thus,
     also increases the chance of observing counterexamples to start learning automata.
   • Small values of N and small number of POMDPs often cause automaton learning
     to occur through the entire interaction. In contrast, higher values of N and bigger

                                            1104
                                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                              Coffee (D110)                                          Coffee (D150)                                          Coffee (D1100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   200 400 600 800 1000                               0   200 400 600 800 1000                               0   200 400 600 800 1000
                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                            CoffeeMail (D110)                                      CoffeeMail (D150)                                      CoffeeMail (D1100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                            0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                            0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500
                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                            VisitABCD (D110)                                       VisitABCD (D150)                                       VisitABCD (D1100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   2000 4000 6000       8000                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000
                            Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                                                    N = 100                           N = 250             N = 500

Figure 10: Learning curves for different combinations of POMDP sets (D110 , D150 , D1100 ) and
           maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).



                        POMDP sets usually concentrate learning early in the interaction. Again, when N
                        is small, the agent has a lower chance of observing a counterexample trace to refine
                        the automaton since the interaction with the environment is shorter. This is specially
                        detrimental in the case of smaller POMDP sets where the goal is particularly difficult
                        to achieve (e.g., if the observables are sparsely distributed in the grid).
    A high maximum episode length seems to be the best choice to make sure that a policy
that achieves the goal is learned. Intuitively, however, such choice can produce longer
traces and can make automaton learning more complex since (1) the chance of observing
irrelevant observables to the task at hand increases (i.e., the system has to learn they are
not important) and (2) it is more difficult to figure out the order in which subgoals must be
observed. Table 8 shows the average total automaton learning time, while Table 9 shows the

                                                                                      1105
                           Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                               D110                                        D150                                       D1100
             N = 100     N = 250          N = 500         N = 100       N = 250        N = 500       N = 100      N = 250        N = 500
Coffee       0.3 (0.0)   0.3 (0.0)            0.4 (0.0)   0.4 (0.0)      0.4 (0.0)       0.6 (0.0)   0.4 (0.0)      0.5 (0.0)      0.5 (0.0)
CoffeeMail   5.9 (1.5)   4.2 (1.1)            9.4 (3.3)   7.8 (1.5)     18.9 (3.3)     49.1 (12.0)   9.2 (1.2)     29.1 (9.4)    64.3 (15.3)
VisitABCD            -           -    2966.4 (1323.9)*            -   163.2 (44.3)    311.9 (63.4)           -   230.7 (99.9)   230.8 (48.2)


Table 8: Total automaton learning time in seconds for different combinations of POMDP
         sets (D110 , D150 , D1100 ) and maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).


                                D110                                        D150                                      D1100
              N = 100       N = 250          N = 500        N = 100       N = 250       N = 500       N = 100       N = 250       N = 500
Coffee         5.8 (0.3)     7.0 (0.3)        7.4 (0.3)     8.4 (0.3)     8.7 (0.4)     10.7 (0.5)    8.6 (0.4)     9.6 (0.5)     9.4 (0.4)
CoffeeMail    24.2 (1.5)    20.6 (1.5)       24.4 (1.7)    24.8 (1.6)    29.0 (1.5)     33.0 (1.5)   29.6 (1.2)    35.7 (1.2)    35.9 (1.6)
VisitABCD              -             -     86.0 (12.0)*             -    54.9 (3.8)     50.6 (3.5)            -    55.2 (6.0)    49.9 (2.5)


Table 9: Number of examples needed to learn the last automaton for different combinations
         of POMDP sets (D110 , D150 , D1100 ) and maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).



average number of examples needed to learn the last automaton in each run. The following
is observed from these tables:

   • The running times generally increase with the maximum episode length. Moreover,
     Table 10 contains the average example length for the D150 POMDP set, which shows
     that the longer the episode is, the longer the counterexamples become.

   • The running times increase when the set of POMDPs becomes bigger, specifically
     when changing from D110 to D150 . This is due to the presence of observations that
     occur within the latter and not in the former. For instance, observables K and o only
     occur together in D150 and D1100 but not in D110 , so additional time is spent to learn
     the transition K ∧ o for the Coffee and CoffeeMail tasks.

   • The number of examples remains similar across different sets of POMDPs. There is
     only a noticeable difference between D110 to D150 because the latter includes observa-
     tions that do not happen in the former, as explained before. Note that such changes
     do not occur in VisitABCD because there is a single path to the accepting state.

   • As shown in Section 8.2, the running time and the number of examples increases with
     the number of subgoals that characterizes the task. Besides, Table 10 shows that the
     example length is longer for the tasks with more subgoals, which can definitely have
     an effect on the time needed to learn the automaton.

    We now briefly examine the results for the set D2 . Figure 11 displays the average
learning curves for different combinations of POMDP subsets and values of N . Table 11
shows the average automaton learning time, whereas Table 12 contains the average number
of examples needed to learn an automaton for different subsets of tasks and maximum
episode lengths (N ). Table 13 shows the average example length of each kind of trace for
different values of N . Table 14 contains the average number of examples needed to learn the

                                                                1106
                                Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




last automaton in a specific setting. In qualitative terms, the main changes we observe with
respect to D1 occur in the VisitABCD task. While N = 100 was usually insufficient to
learn an automaton in D150 across runs, it is enough in D250 . By comparing the VisitABCD
curves, it is clear that D250 consists of POMDPs requiring less steps than those in D150 .
Furthermore, in the case of CoffeeMail, D1100 has more types of joint events than D2100 ,
thus more examples are needed in that case and the final automaton is slightly different.
This shows that the set of POMDPs has an impact on automaton learning.




                              Coffee (D210)                                          Coffee (D250)                                          Coffee (D2100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   200 400 600 800 1000                               0   200 400 600 800 1000                               0   200 400 600 800 1000
                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                            CoffeeMail (D210)                                      CoffeeMail (D250)                                      CoffeeMail (D2100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                            0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500                            0   500 1000 1500 2000 2500
                             Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                            VisitABCD (D210)                                       VisitABCD (D250)                                       VisitABCD (D2100)
                  1.0                                                    1.0                                                    1.0




 Average reward                                         Average reward                                         Average reward
                  0.8                                                    0.8                                                    0.8
                  0.6                                                    0.6                                                    0.6
                  0.4                                                    0.4                                                    0.4
                  0.2                                                    0.2                                                    0.2
                  0.0                                                    0.0                                                    0.0
                        0   2000 4000 6000       8000                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000                          0   2000 4000 6000       8000
                            Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes                                     Number of episodes

                                                    N = 100                           N = 250             N = 500

Figure 11: Learning curves for different combinations of POMDP sets (D210 , D250 , D2100 ) and
           maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).




                                                                                      1107
                            Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                               N = 100                                          N = 250                                    N = 500
                     G               D               I               G                 D          I              G             D             I
 Coffee          2.8 (1.0)     2.1 (1.1)      1.5 (0.9)         3.6 (1.8)       3.0 (2.5)     1.9 (1.4)      5.7 (4.6)     3.6 (2.8)     2.2 (1.4)
 CoffeeMail      4.4 (1.4)     3.3 (2.0)      3.1 (1.8)         5.5 (2.7)       4.1 (2.8)     3.6 (2.2)      7.2 (4.3)     4.9 (3.8)     3.5 (2.3)
 VisitABCD               -             -              -         9.2 (3.0)       5.1 (3.0)     5.4 (3.0)     12.4 (4.2)     6.2 (4.0)     6.3 (4.2)


Table 10: Example length of the goal, dead-end and incomplete examples used to learn the
          last automaton in the D150 setting.


                             D210                                               D250                                         D2100
             N = 100     N = 250         N = 500           N = 100          N = 250          N = 500        N = 100        N = 250        N = 500
Coffee       0.4 (0.0)   0.4 (0.0)       0.4 (0.0)           0.4 (0.0)        0.4 (0.0)        0.4 (0.0)     0.4 (0.0)       0.4 (0.0)      0.4 (0.0)
CoffeeMail   2.8 (0.4)   3.9 (1.1)       8.1 (2.2)           7.8 (3.1)       10.3 (1.6)       24.5 (7.5)     6.8 (1.4)     30.7 (14.6)     22.2 (5.3)
VisitABCD            -           -   802.1 (297.1)        130.1 (46.4)    290.2 (123.1)    481.6 (115.1)   53.2 (15.6)   269.2 (108.0)   355.8 (68.2)


Table 11: Total automaton learning time in seconds for different combinations of POMDP
          sets (D210 , D250 , D2100 ) and maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).


                                 D210                                              D250                                      D2100
               N = 100        N = 250        N = 500            N = 100         N = 250       N = 500        N = 100       N = 250       N = 500
Coffee          7.3 (0.3)     7.6 (0.4)       7.5 (0.5)         8.2 (0.3)      8.3 (0.3)       8.6 (0.5)     8.3 (0.3)     8.0 (0.3)      8.2 (0.3)
CoffeeMail     17.8 (1.1)    17.8 (0.8)      20.6 (1.4)        24.4 (1.5)     26.2 (1.2)      27.2 (1.4)    24.9 (1.2)    29.1 (1.4)     27.4 (1.3)
VisitABCD               -             -      74.8 (8.2)        57.7 (5.6)     53.8 (6.2)      58.6 (3.9)    42.5 (3.3)    51.9 (3.3)     53.3 (3.3)


Table 12: Number of examples needed to learn the last automaton for different combinations
          of POMDP sets (D210 , D250 , D2100 ) and maximum episode lengths (100, 250, 500).


                               N = 100                                          N = 250                                    N = 500
                     G               D               I               G                 D          I              G             D             I
 Coffee          2.8 (1.0)     2.1 (1.1)      1.5 (0.9)         3.6 (1.8)       3.0 (2.5)     1.9 (1.4)      5.7 (4.6)     3.6 (2.8)     2.2 (1.4)
 CoffeeMail      3.5 (1.4)     3.2 (1.7)      2.7 (1.5)         4.3 (2.8)       4.0 (2.6)     3.4 (2.6)      5.1 (4.2)     4.1 (3.1)     3.5 (2.7)
 VisitABCD       7.1 (1.9)     4.6 (2.3)      4.6 (1.9)         8.9 (3.7)       5.5 (3.6)     5.1 (2.6)     11.2 (4.6)     7.1 (4.8)     5.8 (3.3)


Table 13: Example length of the goal, dead-end and incomplete examples used to learn the
          last automaton in the D250 setting.


                                                         All                 G                   D                   I
                   Coffee                           8.7 (0.4)            2.4 (0.1)           3.0 (0.1)        3.2 (0.3)
                   CoffeeMail                      26.2 (1.2)            5.3 (0.3)           8.2 (0.5)       12.6 (0.9)
                   VisitABCD                       53.8 (6.2)            1.6 (0.1)          16.2 (1.4)       36.0 (4.9)

Table 14: Number of examples (total, goal, dead-end and incomplete) needed to learn the
          last automaton in the D250 and N = 250 setting.



                                                                         1108
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                             Time (s.)                         # Examples           Example Length
                     C                   U                     C         U           C            U
 Coffee            0.4 (0.0)            1.5 (0.2)       8.7 (0.4)    11.4 (0.4)   2.8 (2.1)   58.1 (64.6)
 CoffeeMail       18.9 (3.3)     9314.6 (1859.7)       29.0 (1.5)    34.1 (1.4)   4.0 (2.6)   78.1 (65.7)
 VisitABCD      163.2 (44.3)                    -      54.9 (3.8)             -   5.5 (3.1)             -

 Table 15: Automaton learning statistics when trace compression is on (C) and off (U).

                         Time (s.)                         # Examples              Example Length
                         O               Ô                O            Ô            O           Ô
 Coffee              0.4 (0.0)      0.3 (0.0)         8.7 (0.4)      6.4 (0.2)    2.8 (2.1)    1.5 (0.6)
 CoffeeMail         18.9 (3.3)      1.5 (0.1)        29.0 (1.5)     16.1 (0.6)    4.0 (2.6)    2.7 (1.4)
 VisitABCD        163.2 (44.3)      9.2 (1.6)        54.9 (3.8)     30.9 (2.3)    5.5 (3.1)    3.7 (1.8)

Table 16: Automaton learning statistics when the set of observables is unrestricted (O) or
          restricted to a particular task (Ô).



C.2.2 Trace Compression
Compressed traces are applicable to the OfficeWorld tasks since (1) empty observations
are meaningless (i.e., the number of steps is unimportant), and (2) seeing an observation for
more than one step in a row is equivalent to seeing it once. Table 15 shows the impact of
compressed observation traces in automaton learning. We omit the learning curves since the
learned automata (if any) are similar for both types of traces and exhibit close performance.
All runs using uncompressed traces finished on time for Coffee and CoffeeMail; in
contrast, all such runs timed out for VisitABCD. Crucially, compressed traces allow to
learn an automaton for VisitABCD on time. Besides, an automaton is also learned orders
of magnitude faster in CoffeeMail using trace compression. Note that a compressed trace
is considerably shorter than an uncompressed one even in the simplest task (Coffee).

C.2.3 Restricted Observable Set
Table 16 shows how using the restricted observable set Ô for each OfficeWorld task
compares to using the full observable set O. The learning curves are very similar for both
cases, so we do not report them. The restricted observable set Ô causes a sensible decrease
in the automaton learning time, specially for the harder tasks. Similarly, fewer examples
are needed to learn a helpful automaton and the average example length is also reduced.
Intuitively, using only the observables that describe the subgoals eases the learning: the
hypothesis space is smaller and no examples to discard irrelevant observables are needed.

C.2.4 Cyclicity
Table 17 shows the effect that enforcing the automaton to be acyclic has on automaton
learning. The tasks that we have considered so far do not require cycles. Therefore, we

                                                    1109
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




                                Time (s.)                     # Examples              Example Length
                      Acyclic           Cyclic            Acyclic       Cyclic       Acyclic      Cyclic
 Coffee                0.4 (0.0)           0.5 (0.0)       8.7 (0.4)    9.6 (0.4)    2.8 (2.1)   2.7 (2.2)
 CoffeeMail           18.9 (3.3)      774.7 (434.4)       29.0 (1.5)   33.8 (1.7)    4.0 (2.6)   4.0 (2.6)
 VisitABCD          163.2 (44.3)    1961.7 (1123.8)       54.9 (3.8)   81.0 (6.6)    5.5 (3.1)   5.5 (3.3)
 CoffeeDrop          13.9 (8.6)*          0.6 (0.0)      15.0 (3.1)*    9.9 (0.5)   5.4 (3.5)*   5.3 (3.6)
 CoffeeMailDrop                -      312.2 (145.9)                -   37.8 (1.7)            -   7.0 (5.3)

Table 17: Comparison of different automaton learning statistics for the cases where au-
          tomata must be acyclic and where automata can have cycles.



introduce two other tasks, CoffeeDrop and CoffeeMailDrop, whose minimal automata
involve cycles to show that our approach can learn such structures. These tasks modify the
OfficeWorld dynamics such that when the agent steps on a decoration (∗), the coffee is
dropped if the agent holds it. In such case, the agent must go back to the coffee location.
Note that in these tasks there are not dead-end states and, thus, the learned automata do
not have rejecting states.
    The results show a considerable increase in the running time for CoffeeMail and
VisitABCD when the automaton is allowed to have cycles. The fact that the hypothesis
space is bigger does not only cause an increase in the running times, but also in the number
of examples, which must rule out solutions with cycles. In contrast, the average example
length remains approximately the same.
    Regarding the performance in the additional tasks, the results in the cyclic setting
for CoffeeDrop and CoffeeMailDrop are similar to the ones for Coffee and Cof-
feeMail respectively. Note that the average running time is lower in CoffeeMailDrop
than in CoffeeMail since the former has less states than the latter (it does not have a
rejecting state). Besides, the length of the examples is longer since there are no dead-end
states to actively avoid. In contrast, in the acyclic setting an automaton is only found in
10/20 and 2/20 runs for CoffeeDrop and CoffeeMailDrop respectively. Note that
the number of automaton states depends on the trace with the maximum number of times
where the coffee has been picked and dropped. Clearly, these tasks are not well-suited to
be expressed by an acyclic automaton.

C.2.5 Maximum Number of Edges between States
Table 18 shows the effect that increasing the maximum number of edges between two states
from κ = 1 to κ = 2 has on automaton learning. Since the OfficeWorld tasks we consider
have at most one edge from a state to another, we add a new task that can only be learned
with κ > 1 to show ISA can learn such automata. The CoffeeOrMail task consists in
going to the coffee or mail location (it does not matter which) and then go to the office
while avoiding the decorations.
   The results show that the automaton learner does not scale well to higher values of
κ. The case of VisitABCD is the most notable one: only one run has not timed out
with κ = 2. The number of successful runs has also decreased in CoffeeMail from 20

                                                  1110
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




                            Time (s.)                       # Examples              Example Length
                     κ=1              κ=2                κ=1          κ=2          κ=1          κ=2
 Coffee              0.4 (0.0)          1.0 (0.1)       8.7 (0.4)    11.7 (0.6)   2.8 (2.1)    3.1 (2.4)
 CoffeeMail         18.9 (3.3)   2252.7 (623.2)*       29.0 (1.5)   32.5 (1.6)*   4.0 (2.6)   4.0 (2.5)*
 VisitABCD        163.2 (44.3)                  -      54.9 (3.8)             -   5.5 (3.1)            -
 CoffeeOrMail        0.9 (0.1)          1.0 (0.1)      11.7 (0.6)    11.2 (0.4)   2.7 (1.8)    2.4 (2.1)

Table 18: Automaton learning statistics for different maximum number of edges from one
          state to another (κ).



                                 Acyclic                                      Cyclic
                       No SB                 SB                     No SB                 SB
   Coffee               0.5 (0.0)          0.4 (0.0)                 0.5 (0.0)           0.5 (0.0)
   CoffeeMail        277.4 (70.2)         18.9 (3.3)         4204.3 (1334.4)*       774.7 (434.4)
   VisitABCD       1070.0 (725.6)       163.2 (44.3)         3293.5 (1199.2)*     1961.7 (1123.8)

Table 19: Total automaton learning time when symmetry breaking is disabled (No SB) and
          enabled (SB).




to 15; besides, the running time is orders of magnitude higher. While the increase on the
hypothesis space size has caused the running time to vastly increase, the average number
of examples and the average example lengths remain similar with respect to κ = 1.
    Regarding the CoffeeOrMail task, note that it is not much harder than the Coffee
task: a minimal automaton consists of 4 and 5 states for κ = 2 and κ = 1, respectively.
Remember that a minimal automaton for the Coffee task consists of 4 states (regardless
of κ). Despite of the increase on the number of states from κ = 1 to κ = 2, the running
time and the other statistics remain almost the same. However, while κ = 1 is effective in
this case (although it cannot return a minimal automaton), it would not be enough to learn
an automaton for any task requiring an edge with a disjunction to the accepting state (e.g.,
“observe K or B”).

C.2.6 Symmetry Breaking

Table 19 shows the effect that symmetry breaking constraints have on the time required to
learn an automaton. The average number of examples and example length barely change
when symmetry breaking is used, so we do not report the results. The symmetry breaking
constraints speed up automaton learning by an order of magnitude in CoffeeMail (acyclic,
cyclic) and VisitABCD (acyclic). Furthermore, while two runs have timed out for the case
where automata can contain cycles and no symmetry breaking is used (one for CoffeeMail
and one for VisitABCD), no run has timed out when the symmetry breaking is used.

                                                1111
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




References
Andreas, J., Klein, D., & Levine, S. (2017). Modular Multitask Reinforcement Learning
     with Policy Sketches. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
     Learning (ICML), pp. 166–175.
Angluin, D. (1980). Inductive Inference of Formal Languages from Positive Data. Inf.
     Control., 45 (2), 117–135.
Angluin, D. (1987). Learning Regular Sets from Queries and Counterexamples. Inf. Com-
     put., 75 (2), 87–106.
Barto, A. G., & Mahadevan, S. (2003). Recent Advances in Hierarchical Reinforcement
     Learning. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13 (4), 341–379.
Bonet, B., Palacios, H., & Geffner, H. (2009). Automatic Derivation of Memoryless Policies
     and Finite-State Controllers Using Classical Planners. In Proceedings of the Interna-
     tional Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).
Bradtke, S. J., & Duff, M. O. (1994). Reinforcement Learning Methods for Continuous-Time
     Markov Decision Problems. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 393–400.
Brafman, R. I., & Tennenholtz, M. (2002). R-MAX - A General Polynomial Time Algorithm
     for Near-Optimal Reinforcement Learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3, 213–231.
Brooks, R. A. (1989). A Robot that Walks; Emergent Behaviors from a Carefully Evolved
     Network. Neural Computation, 1 (2), 253–262.
Buckland, M. (2004). AI Game Programming by Example. Wordware Publishing Inc.
Calimeri, F., Faber, W., Gebser, M., Ianni, G., Kaminski, R., Krennwallner, T., Leone, N.,
     Maratea, M., Ricca, F., & Schaub, T. (2020). ASP-Core-2 Input Language Format.
     Theory Pract. Log. Program., 20 (2), 294–309.
Camacho, A., Chen, O., Sanner, S., & McIlraith, S. A. (2017). Non-Markovian Rewards
    Expressed in LTL: Guiding Search Via Reward Shaping. In Proceedings of the Inter-
    national Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SOCS), pp. 159–160.
Camacho, A., Icarte, R. T., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R. A., & McIlraith, S. A. (2019).
    LTL and Beyond: Formal Languages for Reward Function Specification in Reinforce-
    ment Learning. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 6065–6073.
Codish, M., Miller, A., Prosser, P., & Stuckey, P. J. (2019). Constraints for symmetry
     breaking in graph representation. Constraints, 24 (1), 1–24.
de la Higuera, C. (2010). Grammatical Inference: Learning Automata and Grammars. Cam-
      bridge University Press.
Dietterich, T. G. (2000). Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with the MAXQ Value Func-
      tion Decomposition. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 13, 227–303.
Drescher, C., Tifrea, O., & Walsh, T. (2011). Symmetry-breaking Answer Set Solving. AI
     Commun., 24 (2), 177–194.

                                          1112
             Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




Furelos-Blanco, D., Law, M., Russo, A., Broda, K., & Jonsson, A. (2020). Induction of Sub-
      goal Automata for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
      on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3890–3897.
Gaon, M., & Brafman, R. I. (2020). Reinforcement Learning with Non-Markovian Rewards.
     In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3980–
     3987.
Gelfond, M., & Kahl, Y. (2014). Knowledge Representation, Reasoning, and the Design of
     Intelligent Agents: The Answer-Set Programming Approach. Cambridge University
     Press.
Gelfond, M., & Lifschitz, V. (1988). The Stable Model Semantics for Logic Programming. In
     Proceedings of the International Conference and Symposium on Logic Programming,
     pp. 1070–1080.
Gold, E. M. (1978). Complexity of Automaton Identification from Given Data. Information
     and Control, 37 (3), 302–320.
Heule, M., & Verwer, S. (2010). Exact DFA Identification Using SAT Solvers. In Pro-
     ceedings of the International Colloquium on Grammatical Inference: Algorithms and
     Applications (ICGI), pp. 66–79.
Ho, M. K., Abel, D., Griffiths, T. L., & Littman, M. L. (2019). The value of abstraction.
     Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 29, 111 – 116.
Hu, Y., & De Giacomo, G. (2011). Generalized Planning: Synthesizing Plans that Work
     for Multiple Environments. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 918–923.
Kaelbling, L. P. (1993). Hierarchical Learning in Stochastic Domains: Preliminary Results.
     In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
     167–173.
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., & Cassandra, A. R. (1998). Planning and Acting in
     Partially Observable Stochastic Domains. Artif. Intell., 101 (1-2), 99–134.
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In Proceed-
    ings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Konidaris, G. (2019). On the necessity of abstraction. Current Opinion in Behavioral
     Sciences, 29, 1 – 7.
Koul, A., Fern, A., & Greydanus, S. (2019). Learning Finite State Representations of Re-
     current Policy Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
     Representations (ICLR).
Kulkarni, T. D., Gupta, A., Ionescu, C., Borgeaud, S., Reynolds, M., Zisserman, A., & Mnih,
     V. (2019). Unsupervised Learning of Object Keypoints for Perception and Control.
     In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
     Conference, pp. 10723–10733.
Lambeau, B., Damas, C., & Dupont, P. (2008). State-Merging DFA Induction Algorithms
    with Mandatory Merge Constraints. In Proceedings of the International Colloquium
    on Grammatical Inference: Algorithms and Applications (ICGI), pp. 139–153.

                                           1113
                   Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Lang, K. J., Pearlmutter, B. A., & Price, R. A. (1998). Results of the Abbadingo One
     DFA Learning Competition and a New Evidence-Driven State Merging Algorithm.
     In Proceedings of the International Colloquium on Grammatical Inference: Algorithms
     and Applications (ICGI), pp. 1–12.
Lange, R. T., & Faisal, A. (2019). Semantic RL with Action Grammars: Data-Efficient
     Learning of Hierarchical Task Abstractions. CoRR, abs/1907.12477.
Law, M., Russo, A., & Broda, K. (2015a). Simplified Reduct for Choice Rules in ASP. Tech.
     rep., DTR2015-2, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, Department
     of Computing.
Law, M., Russo, A., & Broda, K. (2015b). The ILASP System for Learning Answer Set
     Programs..
Law, M., Russo, A., & Broda, K. (2016). Iterative Learning of Answer Set Programs from
     Context Dependent Examples. Theory Pract. Log. Program., 16 (5-6), 834–848.
Law, M., Russo, A., & Broda, K. (2018). The Meta-program Injection Feature in ILASP.
     Tech. rep..
Leonetti, M., Iocchi, L., & Patrizi, F. (2012). Automatic Generation and Learning of Finite-
     State Controllers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intel-
     ligence: Methodology, Systems, Applications (AIMSA), pp. 135–144.
Machado, M. C., Bellemare, M. G., & Bowling, M. H. (2017). A Laplacian Framework
    for Option Discovery in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International
    Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2295–2304.
McGovern, A., & Barto, A. G. (2001). Automatic Discovery of Subgoals in Reinforcement
    Learning using Diverse Density. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
    Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 361–368.
Mehta, N., Ray, S., Tadepalli, P., & Dietterich, T. G. (2008). Automatic Discovery and
    Transfer of MAXQ Hierarchies. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
    Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 648–655.
Menache, I., Mannor, S., & Shimkin, N. (2002). Q-Cut - Dynamic Discovery of Sub-goals
    in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine
    Learning (ECML), pp. 295–306.
Meuleau, N., Peshkin, L., Kim, K., & Kaelbling, L. P. (1999). Learning Finite-State Con-
     trollers for Partially Observable Environments. In Proceedings of the Conference on
     Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pp. 427–436.
Michalenko, J. J., Shah, A., Verma, A., Baraniuk, R. G., Chaudhuri, S., & Patel, A. B.
     (2019). Representing Formal Languages: A Comparison Between Finite Automata
     and Recurrent Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
     Learning Representations (ICLR).
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves,
     A., Riedmiller, M. A., Fidjeland, A., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik,
     A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wierstra, D., Legg, S., & Hassabis, D.

                                           1114
              Induction and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for RL




      (2015). Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518 (7540),
      529–533.
Ng, A. Y., Harada, D., & Russell, S. J. (1999). Policy Invariance Under Reward Transforma-
     tions: Theory and Application to Reward Shaping. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 278–287.
Parr, R., & Russell, S. J. (1997). Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchies of Machines.
      In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
      Conference, pp. 1043–1049.
Segovia Aguas, J., Jiménez, S., & Jonsson, A. (2018). Computing Hierarchical Finite State
     Controllers With Classical Planning. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 62, 755–797.
Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., Sifre,
      L., Kumaran, D., Graepel, T., Lillicrap, T., Simonyan, K., & Hassabis, D. (2018). A
      general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through
      self-play. Science, 362 (6419), 1140–1144.
Simsek, Ö., & Barto, A. G. (2004). Using Relative Novelty to Identify Useful Temporal Ab-
     stractions in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference
     on Machine Learning (ICML).
Simsek, Ö., Wolfe, A. P., & Barto, A. G. (2005). Identifying Useful Subgoals in Rein-
     forcement Learning by Local Graph Partitioning. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 816–823.
Srinivasan, A. (2001). The Aleph Manual..
Stolle, M., & Precup, D. (2002). Learning Options in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceed-
      ings of the International Symposium on Abstraction, Reformulation and Approxima-
      tion (SARA), pp. 212–223.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press.
Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., & Singh, S. P. (1998). Intra-Option Learning about Temporally
     Abstract Actions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), pp. 556–564.
Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., & Singh, S. P. (1999). Between MDPs and Semi-MDPs: A
     Framework for Temporal Abstraction in Reinforcement Learning. Artif. Intell., 112 (1-
     2), 181–211.
Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R. A., & McIlraith, S. A. (2018). Using Re-
     ward Machines for High-Level Task Specification and Decomposition in Reinforce-
     ment Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), pp. 2112–2121.
Toro Icarte, R., Waldie, E., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R. A., Castro, M. P., & McIlraith,
     S. A. (2019). Learning Reward Machines for Partially Observable Reinforcement
     Learning. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 15497–15508.

                                              1115
                    Furelos-Blanco, Law, Jonsson, Broda, & Russo




Torrey, L., Shavlik, J. W., Walker, T., & Maclin, R. (2007). Relational Macros for Transfer in
     Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Inductive
     Logic Programming (ILP), pp. 254–268.
Ulyantsev, V., Zakirzyanov, I., & Shalyto, A. (2015). BFS-Based Symmetry Breaking Pred-
     icates for DFA Identification. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Lan-
     guage and Automata Theory and Applications (LATA), pp. 611–622.
Ulyantsev, V., Zakirzyanov, I., & Shalyto, A. (2016). Symmetry Breaking Predicates for
     SAT-based DFA Identification. CoRR, abs/1602.05028.
van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., & Silver, D. (2016). Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double
     Q-Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
     pp. 2094–2100.
Watkins, C. (1989). Learning from Delayed Rewards. Ph.D. thesis, King’s College, Cam-
    bridge, UK.
Weiss, G., Goldberg, Y., & Yahav, E. (2018). Extracting Automata from Recurrent Neural
     Networks Using Queries and Counterexamples. In Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 5244–5253.
Xu, Z., Gavran, I., Ahmad, Y., Majumdar, R., Neider, D., Topcu, U., & Wu, B. (2020). Joint
     Inference of Reward Machines and Policies for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings
     of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), pp.
     590–598.
Zakirzyanov, I., Morgado, A., Ignatiev, A., Ulyantsev, V., & Marques-Silva, J. (2019). Ef-
     ficient Symmetry Breaking for SAT-Based Minimum DFA Inference. In Proceedings
     of the International Conference on Language and Automata Theory and Applications
     (LATA), pp. 159–173.




                                            1116
