                                         Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 73 (2022) 173-208      Submitted 10/2020; published 01/2022




                                                      Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function
                                                          Structure in Reinforcement Learning

                                         Rodrigo Toro Icarte                                                                  rntoro@uc.cl
                                         Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile
                                         Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
                                         Toryn Q. Klassen                                                          toryn@cs.toronto.edu
                                         University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada




arXiv:2010.03950v2 [cs.LG] 17 Jan 2022
                                         Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
                                         Richard Valenzano                                                   rick.valenzano@ryerson.ca
                                         Ryerson University, Toronto, ON, Canada
                                         Sheila A. McIlraith                                                       sheila@cs.toronto.edu
                                         University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
                                         Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada


                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   Reinforcement learning (RL) methods usually treat reward functions as black boxes.
                                              As such, these methods must extensively interact with the environment in order to discover
                                              rewards and optimal policies. In most RL applications, however, users have to program the
                                              reward function and, hence, there is the opportunity to make the reward function visible –
                                              to show the reward function’s code to the RL agent so it can exploit the function’s internal
                                              structure to learn optimal policies in a more sample efficient manner. In this paper, we
                                              show how to accomplish this idea in two steps. First, we propose reward machines, a type
                                              of finite state machine that supports the specification of reward functions while exposing
                                              reward function structure. We then describe different methodologies to exploit this struc-
                                              ture to support learning, including automated reward shaping, task decomposition, and
                                              counterfactual reasoning with off-policy learning. Experiments on tabular and continu-
                                              ous domains, across different tasks and RL agents, show the benefits of exploiting reward
                                              structure with respect to sample efficiency and the quality of resultant policies. Finally,
                                              by virtue of being a form of finite state machine, reward machines have the expressive
                                              power of a regular language and as such support loops, sequences and conditionals, as well
                                              as the expression of temporally extended properties typical of linear temporal logic and
                                              non-Markovian reward specification.


                                         1. Introduction
                                         A standard assumption in reinforcement learning (RL) is that the agent does not have
                                         access to the environment model (Sutton & Barto, 1998). This means that it does not know
                                         the environment’s transition probabilities or reward function. To learn optimal behaviour,
                                         an RL agent must therefore interact with the environment and learn from its experience.
                                         While assuming that the transition probabilities are unknown seems reasonable, there is
                                         less reason to hide the reward function from the agent. Artificial agents cannot inherently
                                         perceive reward from the environment; someone must program those reward functions. This
                                         is true even if the agent is interacting with the real world. Typically, though, a programmed

                                         ©2022 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




reward function is given as a black box to the agent. The agent can query the function
for the reward in the current situation, but does not have access to whatever structures or
high-level ideas the programmer may have used in defining it. However, an agent that had
access to the specification of the reward function might be able to use such information to
learn optimal policies faster. We consider different ways to do so in this work.
    Previous work on giving an agent knowledge about the reward function focused on
defining a task specification language – usually based on sub-goal sequences (Singh, 1992a,
1992b) or linear temporal logic (Li et al., 2017; Littman et al., 2017; Toro Icarte et al., 2018b;
Hasanbeig et al., 2018; Camacho et al., 2019; De Giacomo et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2020) –
and then generate a reward function towards fulfilling that specification. In this work, we
instead directly tackle the problem of defining reward functions that expose structure to the
agent. As such, our approach is able to reward behaviours to varying degrees in manners
that cannot be expressed by previous approaches.
    There are two main contributions of this work. First, we introduce a type of finite state
machine, called a reward machine, which we use in defining rewards. A reward machine
allows for composing different reward functions in flexible ways, including concatenation,
loops, and conditional rules. As an agent acts in the environment, moving from state to
state, it also moves from state to state within a reward machine (as determined by high-
level events detected within the environment). After every transition, the reward machine
outputs the reward function the agent should use at that time. For example, we might
construct a reward machine for “delivering coffee to an office” using two states. In the first
state, the agent does not receive any rewards, but it moves to the second state whenever it
gets the coffee. In the second state, the agent gets rewards after delivering the coffee. The
advantage of defining rewards this way is that the agent knows that the problem consists
of two stages and might use this information to speed up learning.
    Our second contribution is a collection of RL methods that can exploit a reward ma-
chine’s internal structure to improve sample efficiency. These methods include using the
reward machine for decomposing the problem, shaping the reward functions, and using
counterfactual reasoning in conjunction with off-policy learning to learn policies in a more
sample efficient manner. We also discuss conditions under which these approaches are guar-
anteed to converge to optimal policies and empirically demonstrate the value of exploiting
reward structures in discrete and continuous domains.
    Note that reward functions need not be specified as a reward machine natively to benefit
from the learning methods presented in this paper. Rather, functions can be specified in
a diversity of languages and automatically translated to a reward machine as argued by
Camacho et al. (2019) and realized to a degree by Middleton et al. (2020). Further, reward
machines can be learned from data and from demonstrations as we discuss in Section 6.
    This paper builds upon our previous work (Toro Icarte et al., 2018c) – where we originally
proposed reward machines and an approach, called Q-learning for reward machines (QRM),
to exploit the structure exposed by a reward machine. This paper also covers an approach for
automated reward shaping from a given reward machine that we later introduced (Camacho
et al., 2019). Since then, we have gathered additional practical experience and theoretical
understanding about reward machines that are reflected in this paper. Concretely, we
provide a cleaner definition of a reward machine and propose two novel approaches to
exploit its structure, called counterfactual experiences for reward machines (CRM) and

                                               174
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




hierarchical RL for reward machines (HRM). We expanded the related work discussion to
include recent trends in reward machine research and included new empirical results in
single task, multitask, and continuous control learning problems. Finally, we have released
a new implementation of our code that is fully compatible with the OpenAI Gym API
(Brockman et al., 2016). We hope that this paper and code will facilitate future research
on reward machines.

2. Reinforcement Learning
The RL problem consists of an agent interacting with an unknown environment. Usually,
the environment is modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP). An MDP is a tuple M =
hS, A, r, p, γi where S is a finite set of states, A is a finite set of actions, r : S × A × S → R
is the reward function, p(st+1 |st , at ) is the transition probability distribution, and γ ∈ (0, 1]
is the discount factor. In some cases, a subset of the states are labelled as terminal states.
    A policy π(a|s) is a probability distribution over the actions a ∈ A given a state s ∈ S.
At each time step t, the agent is in a particular state st ∈ S, selects an action at according
to π(·|st ), and executes at . The agent then receives a new state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ) and an
immediate reward r(st , at , st+1 ) from the environment. The process then repeats from st+1
until potentially reaching a terminal state. The agent’s goal isPto find an optimal policy
                                                                           ∞
π ∗ that maximizes the expected discounted return Gt = Eπ                        k
                                                                           k=0 γ rt+k St = s when
starting from any state s ∈ S and time step t.
    The Q-function q π (s, a) under a policy π is defined as the expected discounted return
of taking action a in state s and then following policy π. It is known that every optimal
                                                                             ∗
policy π ∗ satisfies the Bellman optimality equations (where q ∗ = q π ):
                                X                                             
                      ∗                  0               0            ∗ 0 0
                    q (s, a) =      p(s |s, a) r(s, a, s ) + γ max
                                                                0
                                                                     q (s , a ) ,               (1)
                                                                 a ∈A
                               s0 ∈S

for every state s ∈ S and action a ∈ A. Note that, if q ∗ is known, then an optimal policy
can be computed by always selecting the action a with the highest value of q ∗ (s, a).

2.1 Tabular Q-Learning
Tabular Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) is a well-known approach for RL. This al-
gorithm works by using the agent’s experience to estimate the optimal Q-function. We
denote this Q-value estimate as q̃(s, a). On every iteration, the agent observes the cur-
rent state s and chooses an action a according to some exploratory policy. One common
exploratory policy is the -greedy policy, which selects a random action with probability
, and arg maxa q̃(s, a) with probability 1 − . Given the resulting state s0 and immediate
reward r(s, a, s0 ), this experience is used to update q̃(s, a) as follows:
                                       α
                                      − r(s, a, s0 ) + γ max
                             q̃(s, a) ←                   0
                                                             q̃(s0 , a0 ) ,                     (2)
                                                           a
                                                                                α
where α is an hyperparameter called the learning rate, and we use x ←          − y as shorthand
                                                       α
notation for x ← x + α · (y − x). Note that q̃(s, a) ← − r(s, a, s0 ) when s0 is a terminal state.
    Tabular Q-learning is guaranteed to converge to an optimal policy in the limit as long
as each state-action pair is visited infinitely often. This algorithm is an off-policy learning

                                                  175
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




method since it can learn from the experience generated by any policy. Unfortunately,
tabular Q-learning is impractical when solving problems with large state spaces. In such
cases, function approximation methods like DQN are often used.

2.2 Deep Q-Networks (DQN)
Deep Q-Network (DQN), proposed by Mnih et al. (2015), is a method which approximates
the Q-function with an estimate q̃θ (s, a) using a deep neural network with parameters θ.
To train the network, mini-batches of experiences (s, a, r, s0 ) are randomly sampled from
an experience replay buffer and used to minimize the square error between q̃θ (s, a) and the
Bellman estimate r + γ maxa0 q̃θ0 (s0 , a0 ). The updates are made with respect to a target
network with parameters θ0 . The parameters θ0 are held fixed when minimizing the square
error, but updated to θ after a certain number of training updates. The role of the target
network is to stabilize learning. DQN inherits the off-policy behaviour from tabular Q-
learning, but is no longer guaranteed to converge to an optimal policy.
    Since its original publication, several improvements have been proposed to DQN. We
consider one of them in this paper: Double DQN (Van Hasselt et al., 2016). Double DQN
uses two neural networks, parameterized by θ and θ0 , to decouple action selection from value
estimation, and thereby decrease the overestimation bias that DQN is known to suffer from.
As such, double DQN usually outperforms DQN while preserving its off-policy nature.

2.3 Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)
DQN cannot solve continuous control problems because DQN’s network has one output unit
per possible action and the space of possible actions is infinite in continuous control prob-
lems. For those cases, actor-critic approaches such as Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
(DDPG) (Lillicrap et al., 2016) are preferred. DDPG is an off-policy actor-critic approach
that also uses neural networks for approximating the Q-value q̃θ (s, a). However, in this case
the action can take continuous values. To decide which action to take in a given state s, an
actor network πµ (s) is learned. The actor network receives the current state and outputs a
(possibly continuous) action to execute in the environment.
      Training q̃θ (s, a) is done by minimizing the Bellman error and letting the actor policy
select the next action. Given a set of experiences (s, a, r, s0 ) sampled from the experi-
ence replay buffer, θ is updated towards minimizing the square error between q̃θ (s, a) and
r + γ q̃θ0 (s0 , πµ0 (s0 )), where θ0 and µ0 are the parameters of target networks for the Q-value
estimate and the actor policy. Training the actor policy πµ (s) is done by moving its out-
put towards arg maxa q̃θ (s, a). To do so, πµ (s) is updated using the expected gradient of
q̃θ (s, a) when a = πµ (s): ∇µ [q̃θ (s, a)|s = st , a = πµ (st )]. This gradient is approximated
using sampled mini-batches from the experience replay buffer. Finally, the target network’s
                                                           τ           τ
parameters are periodically updated as follows: θ0 ←      − θ and µ0 ← − µ, where τ ∈ (0, 1).

3. Reward Machines
In this section, we introduce a novel type of finite state machine, called a reward machine
(RM). An RM takes abstracted descriptions of the environment as input, and outputs
reward functions. The intuition is that the agent will be rewarded by different reward

                                               176
             Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




                                                                                 start
         B          [          [          C                                                h[, 0i
                K                                          h¬K ∧ ¬[, 0i           u0

                    o          B                                     hK ∧ ¬[, 0i
         [                                [
                                                                                           h[, 0i
                                                            h¬o ∧ ¬[, 0i          u1
                                   K
         A          [          [          D                           ho ∧ ¬[, 1i
                                                                                       t
               (a) The office gridworld                        (b) A simple reward machine

               Figure 1: An example environment and one reward machine for it


functions at different times, depending on the state in the RM. Hence, an RM can be used
to define temporally extended (and as such, non-Markovian) tasks and behaviours. We then
show that an RM can be interpreted as specifying a single reward function over a larger
state space, and consider types of reward functions that can be expressed using RMs.
    As a running example, consider the office gridworld presented in Figure 1a. In this
environment, the agent can move in the four cardinal directions. It picks up coffee if at
location K, picks up the mail if at location B, and delivers the coffee and mail to an office
if at location o. The building contains decorations [, which the agent breaks if it steps on
them. Finally, there are four marked locations: A, B, C, and D. In the rest of this section,
we will show how to define tasks for an RL agent in this environment using RMs.
    A reward machine is defined over a set of propositional symbols P. Intuitively, P is a set
of relevant high-level events from the environment that the agent can detect. In the office
gridworld, we can define P = {K, B, o, [, A, B, C, D}, where event e ∈ P occurs when the
agent is at location e. We can now formally define a reward machine as follows:

Definition 3.1 (reward machine). Given a set of propositional symbols P, a set of (en-
vironment) states S, and a set of actions A, a reward machine (RM) is a tuple RPSA =
hU, u0 , F, δu , δr i where U is a finite set of states, u0 ∈ U is an initial state, F is a finite set of
terminal states (where U ∩ F = ∅), δu is the state-transition function, δu : U × 2P → U ∪ F ,
and δr is the state-reward function, δr : U → [S × A × S → R].

    A reward machine RPSA starts in state u0 , and at each subsequent time is in some state
ut ∈ U ∪ F . At every step t, the machine receives as input a truth assignment σt , which is a
set that contains exactly those propositions in P that are currently true in the environment.
For example, in the office gridworld, σt = {e} if the agent is at a location marked as e.
Then the machine moves to the next state ut+1 = δu (ut , σt ) according to the state-transition
function, and outputs a reward function rt = δr (ut ) according to the state-reward function.
This process repeats until the machine reaches a terminal state. Note that reward machines
can model never-ending tasks by defining F = ∅.
    In our examples, we will be considering simple reward machines (which we later prove
are a particular case of reward machines), defined as follows:

                                                  177
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Definition 3.2 (simple reward machine). Given a set of propositional symbols P, a simple
reward machine is a tuple RP = hU, u0 , F, δu , δr i where U , u0 , F , and δu are defined as in
a standard reward machine, but the state-reward function δr : U × 2P → R depends on 2P
and returns a number instead of a function.

    Figure 1b shows a graphical representation of a simple reward machine for the office
gridworld. Every node in the graph is a state of the machine, u0 being the initial state.
Terminal states are represented by black circles. Each edge is labelled by a tuple hϕ, ci,
where ϕ is a propositional logic formula over P and c is a real number. An edge between
ui and uj labelled by hϕ, ci means that δu (ui , σ) = uj whenever σ |= ϕ (i.e., the truth
assignment σ satisfies ϕ), and δr (ui , σ) returns a reward of c. For instance, the edge between
the state u1 and the terminal state t labelled by ho ∧ ¬[, 1i means that the machine will
transition from u1 to t if the proposition o becomes true and [ is false, and output a reward
of one. Intuitively, this machine outputs a reward of one if and only if the agent delivers
coffee to the office while not breaking any of the decorations. The blue path in Figure 1a
shows an optimal way to complete this task, and the red path shows a sub-optimal way.
    Now that we have defined a reward machine, we can use it to reward an agent. To do
so, we require a labelling function L : S × A × S → 2P . L assigns truth values to symbols
in P given an environment experience e = (s, a, s0 ), where s0 is the resulting state after
executing action a from state s. The labelling function plays the key role of producing the
truth assignments that are input to the reward machine, as discussed below.

Definition 3.3. A Markov decision process with a reward machine (MDPRM) is a tuple
T = hS, A, p, γ, P, L, U, u0 , F, δu , δr i, where S, A, p, and γ are defined as in an MDP, P is a
set of propositional symbols, L is a labelling function L : S × A × S → 2P , and U, u0 , F, δu ,
and δr are defined as in a reward machine.

    The RM in an MDPRM T is updated at every step of the agent in the environment.
If the RM is in state u and the agent performs action a to move from state s to s0 in the
MDP, then the RM moves to state u0 = δu (u, L(s, a, s0 )) and the agent receives a reward of
r(s, a, s0 ), where r = δr (u). For a simple reward machine, the reward is δr (u, L(s, a, s0 )).
    In the running example (Figure 1), for instance, the reward machine starts in u0 and
stays there until the agent reaches a location marked with [ or K. If [ is reached (i.e.,
a decoration is broken), the machine moves to a terminal state, ending the episode and
providing no reward to the agent. In contrast, if K is reached, the machine moves to u1 .
While the machine is in u1 , two outcomes might occur. The agent might reach a [, moving
the machine to a terminal state and returning no reward, or it might reach the office o, also
moving the machine to a terminal state but giving the agent a reward of 1.
    Note that the rewards the agent gets may be non-Markovian relative to the environment
(the states of S), though they are Markovian relative to the elements in S × U . As such,
when making decisions on what action to take in an MDPRM, the agent should consider
not just the current environment state st ∈ S but also the current RM state ut ∈ U .
    A policy π(a|hs, ui) for an MDPRM is a probability distribution over actions a ∈ A
given a pair hs, ui ∈ S × U . We can think of an MDPRM as defining an MDP with state
set S × U , as described in the following observation.


                                               178
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Observation 1. Given an MDPRM T = hS, A, p, γ, P, L, U, u0 , F, δu , δr i, let MT be the
MDP hS 0 , A0 , r0 , p0 , γ 0 i defined such that S 0 = S × (U ∪ F ), A0 = A, γ 0 = γ,
                                       
                                           0           if u ∈ F and u0 = u
                                       p(s |s, a)
                                       
            p0 (hs0 , u0 i|hs, ui, a) = p(s0 |s, a)    if u ∈ U and u0 = δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
                                       
                                        0              otherwise
                                       


and r0 (hs, ui, a, hs0 , u0 i) = δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) if u 6∈ F (zero otherwise). Then any policy for MT
achieves the same expected discounted return in T , and vice versa.

   We can now see why simple reward machines are a particular case of reward machines.
Basically, for any labelling function, we can set the Markovian reward functions in a reward
machine to mimic the reward given by a simple reward machine, as shown below.

Observation 2. Given any labelling function L : S × A × S → 2P , a simple reward
machine RP = hU, u0 , F, δu , δr i is equivalent to a reward machine RPSA = hU, u0 , F, δu , δr0 i
where δr0 (u)(s, a, s0 ) = δr (u, L(s, a, s0 )) for all u ∈ U , s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and s0 ∈ S. That is,
both RP and RPSA will be at the same RM state and output the same reward for every
possible sequence of environment state-action pairs.

   Finally, we note that RMs can express any Markovian and some non-Markovian reward
functions. In particular, given a set of states S and actions A, the following properties hold:

   1. Any Markovian reward function R : S × A × S → R can be expressed by a reward
      machine with one state.

   2. A non-Markovian reward function R : (S × A)∗ → R can be expressed using a reward
      machine if the reward depends on the state and action history (S × A)∗ only to the
      extent of distinguishing among those histories that are described by different elements
      of a finite set of regular expressions over elements in S × A × S.

   3. Non-Markovian reward functions R : (S × A)∗ → R that distinguish between histories
      via properties not expressible as regular expressions over elements in S × A × S (such
      as counting how many times a state has been reached) cannot be expressed using a
      reward machine.

    In other words, reward machines can return different rewards for the same transition
(s, a, s0 ) in the environment, for different histories of states and actions seen by the agent,
as long as the history can be represented by a regular language. This holds because reg-
ular languages are exactly those that are accepted by deterministic finite state automata
(Hopcroft & Ullman, 1979). As such, RMs can specify structure in the reward function
that includes loops, conditional statements, and sequence interleaving, as well as behavioral
constraints, such as safety constraints. For example, the first task used in Section 5.3 has
loops, task 4 in Table 3 involves sequence interleaving, and task 1 in Table 1 includes a
safety constraint. To allow for structure beyond what is expressible by regular languages
requires that the agent has access to an external memory, which we leave as future work.

                                                      179
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Algorithm 1 The cross-product baseline using tabular Q-learning.
 1: Input: S, A, γ ∈ (0, 1], α ∈ (0, 1],  ∈ (0, 1], P, L, U , u0 , F , δu , δr .
 2: For all s ∈ S, u ∈ U , and a ∈ A, initialize q̃(s, u, a) arbitrarily
 3: for l ← 0 to num episodes do
 4:   Initialize u ← u0 and s ← EnvInitialState()
 5:   while s is not terminal and u 6∈ F do
 6:     Choose action a from (s, u) using policy derived from q̃ (e.g., -greedy)
 7:     Take action a and observe the next state s0
 8:     Compute the reward r ← δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) and next RM state u0 ← δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
 9:     if s0 is terminal or u0 ∈ F then
                       α
10:        q̃(s, u, a) ←
                       −r
11:     else
                       α
12:                    − r + γ maxa0 ∈A q̃(s0 , u0 , a0 )
           q̃(s, u, a) ←
13:     Update s ← s0 and u ← u0


Relationship to Mealy and Moore Machines A reader familiar with automata theory
will recognize that, except for the terminal states, reward machines are Moore machines
(with an output alphabet of reward functions) and simple reward machines are Mealy
machines (with an output alphabet of numbers). As such, it seems reasonable to consider a
more general form of Mealy reward machine where reward functions (and not just numbers)
are output by each RM transition. That was actually our original definition of a reward
machine (Toro Icarte et al., 2018c; Camacho et al., 2019). However, following the same
argument from Observation 2, we can see that any such Mealy reward machine can be
encoded by a (Moore) reward machine using fewer reward functions (one per node instead
of per edge). For reward machines that just output numbers, on the other hand, Mealy
machines have the advantage of, in some cases, requiring fewer states to represent the same
reward signal (also, their first output can depend on the input, unlike for a Moore machine).

4. Exploiting the RM Structure in Reinforcement Learning
In this section, we describe a collection of RL approaches to learn policies for MDPRMs.
We begin by describing a baseline that uses standard RL. We then discuss three approaches
that exploit the information in the reward machine to facilitate learning. In all these cases,
we include pseudo-code for their tabular implementation, describe how to extend them to
work with deep RL, and discuss their convergence guarantees.

4.1 The Cross-Product Baseline
    As discussed in Observation 1, MDPRMs are regular MDPs when considering the cross-
product between the environment states S and the reward machine states U . As such, any
RL algorithm can be used to learn a policy π(a|s, u) – including tabular RL methods and
deep RL methods. If the RL algorithm is guaranteed to converge to optimal policies, then
it will also find optimal policies for the MDPRM.
    As a concrete example, Algorithm 1 shows pseudo-code for solving MDPRMs using
tabular Q-learning. The only difference with standard Q-learning is that it also keeps track

                                                 180
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Algorithm 2 Tabular Q-learning with counterfactual experiences for RMs (CRM).
 1: Input: S, A, γ ∈ (0, 1], α ∈ (0, 1],  ∈ (0, 1], P, L, U , u0 , F , δu , δr .
 2: For all s ∈ S, u ∈ U , and a ∈ A, initialize q̃(s, u, a) arbitrarily
 3: for l ← 0 to num episodes do
 4:   Initialize u ← u0 and s ← EnvInitialState()
 5:   while s is not terminal and u 6∈ F do
 6:     Choose action a from (s, u) using policy derived from q̃ (e.g., -greedy)
 7:     Take action a and observe the next state s0
 8:     Compute the reward r ← δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) and next RM state u0 ← δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
 9:     Set experience ← {hs, ū, a, δr (ū)(s, a, s0 ), s0 , δu (ū, L(s, a, s0 ))i | ∀ū ∈ U }
10:     for hs, ū, a, r̄, s0 , ū0 i ∈ experience do
11:        if s0 is terminal or ū0 ∈ F then
                            α
12:           q̃(s, ū, a) ←− r̄
13:        else
                            α
14:           q̃(s, ū, a) ←− r̄ + γ maxa0 ∈A q̃(s0 , ū0 , a0 )
15:     Update s ← s0 and u ← u0


of the current RM state u and learns Q-values over the cross-product q̃(s, u, a). This allows
the agent to consider the current environment state s and RM state u when selecting the
next action a. Given the current experience hs, u, a, r, s0 , u0 i, where hs0 , u0 i is the cross-
product state reached after executing action a in state hs, ui and receiving a reward r, the
                                                       α
                                                       − r + γ maxa0 q̃(s0 , u0 , a0 ).
Q-value q̃(s, u, a) is updated as follows: q̃(s, u, a) ←
    While this method has the advantage of allowing for the use of any RL method to
solve MDPRMs, it does not exploit the information exposed by the RM. Below, we discuss
different approaches that make use of such information to learn policies for MDPRMs faster.

4.2 Counterfactual Experiences for Reward Machines (CRM)
Our first method to exploit the information from the reward machine is called counter-
factual experiences for reward machines (CRM). This approach also learns policies over
the cross-product π(a|s, u), but uses counterfactual reasoning to generate synthetic experi-
ences. These experiences can then be used by an off-policy learning method, such as tabular
Q-learning, DQN, or DDPG, to learn a policy π(a|s, u) faster.
    Suppose that the agent performed action a when in the cross-product state hs, ui and
then reached state hs0 , u0 i while receiving a reward of r. For every RM state ū ∈ U , we
know that if the agent had been at ū when a caused the transition from s to s0 , then the
next RM state would have been ū0 = δu (ū, L(s, a, s0 )) and the agent would have received a
reward of r̄ = δr (ū)(s, a, s0 ). This is the key idea behind CRM. What CRM does is that,
after every action, instead of feeding only the actual experience hs, u, a, r, s0 , u0 i to the RL
agent, it feeds one experience per RM state, i.e., the following set of experiences:

                     {hs, ū, a, δr (ū)(s, a, s0 ), s0 , δu (ū, L(s, a, s0 ))i | ∀ū ∈ U }.   (3)

   Notice that incorporating CRM into an off-policy learning method is trivial. For in-
stance, Algorithm 2 shows that CRM can be included in tabular Q-learning by adding two

                                                      181
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




lines of code (lines 9 and 10). CRM can also be easily adapted to other off-policy methods by
adjusting how the generated experiences are then used for learning. For example, for both
DQN and DDPG, the counterfactual experiences would simply be added to the experience
replay buffer and then used for learning as is typically done with these algorithms.
    In Section 5, we will show empirically that CRM can be very effective at learning policies
for MDPRMs. The intuition behind its good performance is that CRM allows the agent to
reuse experience to learn the right behaviour at different RM states. Consider, for instance,
the RM from Figure 1b, which rewards the agent for delivering a coffee to the office. Suppose
that the agent gets to the office before getting the coffee. The cross-product baseline would
use that experience to learn that going to the office is not an effective way to get coffee. In
contrast, CRM would also use that experience to learn how to get to the office. As such,
CRM will already have made progress towards learning a policy that will finish the task as
soon as it finds the coffee, since it will already have experience about how to get to the office.
Importantly, CRM also converges to optimal policies when combined with Q-learning:
Theorem 4.1. Given an MDPRM T = hS, A, p, γ, P, L, U, u0 , F, δu , δr i, CRM with tabular
Q-learning converges to an optimal policy for T in the limit (as long as every state-action
pair is visited infinitely often).
Proof. The convergence proof provided by Watkins and Dayan (1992) for tabular Q-learning
applies directly to the case of CRM when we consider that each experience produced by
CRM is still sampled according its transition probability p(hs0 , u0 i|hs, ui, a) = p(s0 |s, a).

4.2.1 Q-Learning for Reward Machines (QRM)
In the original paper on reward machines (Toro Icarte et al., 2018c), we proposed Q-learning
for reward machines (QRM) as a way to exploit reward machine structure. CRM and QRM
are both based on the same fundamental idea: to reuse experience to simultaneously learn
optimal behaviours for the different RM states. The key difference is that CRM learns a
single Q-value function q̃(s, u, a) that takes into account both the environment and RM
state, while QRM learns a separate Q-value function q̃u for each RM state u ∈ U . Formally,
QRM uses any experience hs, a, s0 i to update each q̃u as follows:
                               α
                               − δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) + γ max
                    q̃u (s, a) ←                        0
                                                           q̃δu (u,L(s,a,s0 )) (s0 , a0 )     (4)
                                                          a ∈A

    Note that QRM will behave identically to Q-learning with CRM in the tabular case.
Intuitively, this is because the Q-value function q̃(s, u, a) of CRM can be partitioned by
reward machine state, to yield reward machine state specific Q-value functions just as in
QRM. The corresponding updates will thus be identical.
    However, QRM and CRM can differ when using function approximation. Consider,
for example, the case of using Deep Q-Networks for function approximation. While the
definition of QRM suggests the use of a separate Q-network for each RM state, CRM will
learn a single Q-network that covers all the RM states. We note that the need for separate
Q-networks makes the implementation of deep QRM fairly complex. In contrast, combining
CRM with DQN or DDPG is trivial: it only requires adding the reward machine state to
the experiences when they are being added to the experience replay buffer. We will also see
that CRM performs slightly better than QRM in our deep RL experiments.

                                                    182
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




4.3 Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Reward Machines (HRM)

Our second approach to exploit the structure of a reward machine is based on hierarchical
reinforcement learning (HRL), in particular, the options framework (Sutton et al., 1999).
The overall idea is to decompose the problem into subproblems, called options, that are
potentially simpler to solve. Formally, an option is a triple hI, π, βi, where I is the initiation
set (the subset of the state space in which the option can be started), π is the policy that
chooses actions while the option is being followed, and β gives the probability that the
option will terminate in each state.
    In our case, the agent will learn a set of options for the cross-product MDP, that focus
on learning how to move from one RM state to another RM state. Then, a higher-level
policy will learn how to select among those options in order to collect reward.
     As an example, consider the reward machine shown in Figure 2b. This machine rewards
the agent when it delivers a coffee and the mail to the office. To do so, the agent might
first get the coffee, then the mail, and go to the office. Alternatively, the agent might
get the mail first, then the coffee, and then go to the office. For this reward machine, our
hierarchical RL method will learn one option per edge for a total of nine options: five for the
transitions between different RM states, and four corresponding to the self-loop transitions
that remain in the same RM state. That is, the method will learn one policy to get a coffee
before getting the mail (moving from u0 to u1 ), one policy to get the mail before getting
a coffee (moving from u0 to u2 ), one policy to get a coffee (moving from u2 to u3 ), one
policy to get the mail (moving from u1 to u3 ), one policy to go to the office (moving from
u3 to the terminal state), and one policy for each possible transition that remains in the
same RM state (from ui to ui for all i). The role of the high-level policy is to decide which
option to execute next among these available options. For instance, if the RM state is in
u0 , the high-level policy will decide whether to get a coffee first (moving to u1 ), the mail
(moving to u2 ), or neither (staying in u0 ). To make this decision, it will consider the current
environment state and, thus, it can learn to get the coffee or mail depending on which one
is closer to the agent.
    More generally, we learn one option for each pair of RM states hu, ut i that are connected
in the RM, including self-loop edges where u = ut . We will name the options with the
pairs of RM states hu, ut i that they correspond to. This means that the set of options is
A = {hu, δu (u, σ)i | u ∈ U, σ ∈ 2P }. The option hu, ut i will have its initiation set defined to
contain all the states in the cross-product MDP where the RM state is u: Ihu,ut i = {hs, ui :
s ∈ S}. The termination condition is then defined as follows:

                                           (
                                0   0       1   if u0 6= u or s0 is terminal
                       βhu,ut i (s , u ) =                                                    (5)
                                            0   otherwise


That is, the option hu, ut i terminates (deterministically) when a new RM state is reached
or a terminal environment state is reached. Since hu, ut i can only be executed when the RM
state is u, its policy can be described in terms of the environment state s only. As such, we
refer to the option policy as πu,ut (a|s).

                                                183
                        Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




                 h¬D, 0i            h¬C, 0i                       h¬K, 0i            h¬o, 0i

                           hC, 0i                                           hK, 0i
                   u3                 u2                            u2                 u3
                                                                                               ho, 1i

              hD, 1i                    hB, 0i        h¬K ∧ B, 0i                        hB, 0i


      start        u0                 u1                start       u0                 u1
                           hA, 0i                                           hK, 0i

                 h¬A, 0i            h¬B, 0i                     h¬K ∧ ¬B, 0i         h¬B, 0i
           (a) Patrol A, B, C, and D                        (b) Deliver a coffee and the mail

                  Figure 2: Two more reward machines for the office gridworld


   Since the objective of option πu,ut is to induce the reward machine to transition to ut as
soon as possible, we train the option policy πu,ut (a|s) using the following reward function:
                            
                                           0      +     if ut 6= u and ut = δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
                            δr (u)(s, a, s ) + r
                            
         ru,ut (s, a, s0 ) = δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) + r−     if ut 6= u and ut 6= δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))       (6)
                            
                             δr (u)(s, a, s0 )          otherwise
                            

where r+ and r− are hyperparameters. This reward function states that the policy πu,ut gets
the usual reward δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) plus an additional reward of r+ (a bonus) when the transition
(s, a, s0 ) causes the RM state to move from u to ut (unless u = ut ) and an additional reward
of r− (a penalization) when it causes the RM state to move from u to some other state
ū 6∈ {u, ut }. Crucially, the policies for all the options will be learned simultaneously, using
off-policy RL and counterfactual experience generation.
     The high-level policy decides which option to execute next from the set of available
options. The policy π(ut |s, u) being learned will determine the probability of executing
each option hu, ut i ∈ A given the current environment state s and RM state u. We note
that this high-level policy can only choose among the options that start at the current RM
state u. To train this policy, we use the reward coming from the reward machine.
     Algorithm 3 shows pseudocode for this approach, which we call hierarchical reinforce-
ment learning for reward machines (HRM), when using tabular Q-learning. Tabular Q-
learning could be replaced by any other off-policy method such as DQN or DDPG. The
algorithm begins by initializing one Q-value estimate q̃(s, u, ut ) for the high-level policy and
one Q-value estimate q̃u,ut (s, a) for each option hu, ut i ∈ A. At every step, the agent first
checks if a new option has to be selected and then does so using q̃(s, u, ut ) (lines 8–10).
This option takes the control of the agent until it reaches a terminal transition. The cur-
rent option selects the next action a ∈ A, executes it, and reaches the next state s0 (lines
11–12). The experience (s, a, s0 ) is used to compute the next RM state u0 = δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
and reward r = δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) (line 13), and also to update the option policies by giving

                                                  184
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Algorithm 3 Tabular hierarchical RL for reward machines (HRM).
 1: Input: S, A, γ ∈ (0, 1], α ∈ (0, 1],  ∈ (0, 1], P, L, U , u0 , F , δu , δr .
 2: A(u) ← {ut | ut = δu (u, σ) for some ut ∈ U ∪ F, σ ∈ 2P } for all u ∈ U
 3: For all s ∈ S, u ∈ U , and ut ∈ A(u), initialize the high-level q̃(s, u, ut ) arbitrarily
 4: For all s ∈ S, u ∈ U , ut ∈ A(u), and a ∈ A, initialize option q̃u,ut (s, a) arbitrarily
 5: for l ← 0 to num episodes do
 6:   Initialize u ← u0 , s ← EnvInitialState(), and ut ← ∅
 7:   while s is not terminal and u 6∈ F do
 8:     if ut = ∅ then
 9:        Choose option ut ∈ A(u) using policy derived from q̃ (e.g., -greedy)
10:        Set rt ← 0 and t ← 0
11:     Choose action a from s using policy derived from q̃u,ut (e.g., -greedy)
12:     Take action a and observe the next state s0
13:     Compute the reward r ← δr (u)(s, a, s0 ) and next RM state u0 ← δu (u, L(s, a, s0 ))
14:     for ū ∈ U, ūt ∈ A(ū) do
15:        if δu (ū, L(s, a, s0 )) 6= u or s0 is terminal then
                              α
16:                           − rū,ūt (s, a, s0 )
              q̃ū,ūt (s, a) ←
17:        else
                              α
18:                           − rū,ūt (s, a, s0 ) + γ maxa0 ∈A q̃ū,ūt (s0 , a0 )
              q̃ū,ūt (s, a) ←
19:     if s0 is terminal or u0 6= u then
20:        if s0 is terminal or u0 ∈ F then
                              α
21:           q̃(s, u, ut ) ← − rt + γ t r
22:        else
                              α
23:           q̃(s, u, ut ) ← − rt + γ t r + γ t+1 maxu0t ∈A(u0 ) q̃(s0 , u0 , u0t )
24:        Set ut ← ∅
25:     Update s ← s0 and u ← u0
26:     Update rt ← rt + γ t r
27:     Update t ← t + 1



a reward of rū,ūt (s, a, s0 ) to each option hū, ūt i ∈ A (lines 14–18). Finally, the high-level
policy is updated when the option ends (lines 19–24) and the loop starts over from hs0 , u0 i.
    HRM can be very effective at quickly learning good policies for MDPRMs. Its strength
comes from its ability to learn policies for all of the options simultaneously through off-
policy learning. However, it might converge to sub-optimal solutions, even in the tabular
case. This is because the option-based approach is myopic: the learned option policies
will always try to transition as quickly as possible without considering how that will affect
performance after the transition occurs. An example of this behaviour is shown in Figure 1.
The task consists of delivering a coffee to the office. As such, the optimal high-level policy
will correctly learn to go for the coffee at state u0 and then go to the office at state u1 .
However, the optimal option policy for getting the coffee will move to the closest coffee
station (following the sub-optimal red path in Figure 1a) because (i) that option gets a
large reward when it reaches the coffee, and (ii) optimal policies will always prefer to collect
such a reward as soon as possible. As a result, HRM will converge to a sub-optimal policy.

                                                 185
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




   We note that HRM can use prior knowledge about the environment to prune useless
options. For example, in our experiments we do not learn options for the self-loops, since
no optimal high-level policy would need to self-loop in our domains. We also do not learn
options that lead to “bad” terminal states, such as breaking decorations in Figure 1b.

4.4 Automated Reward Shaping (RS)
Our last method for exploiting reward machines builds on the idea of potential-based reward
shaping (Ng et al., 1999). The intuition behind reward shaping is that some reward functions
are easier to learn policies for than others, even if those functions have the same optimal
policy. Typically, this involves providing some intermediate rewards as the agent gets closer
to completing the task. To that end, Ng et al. (1999) formally showed that given any MDP
M = hS, A, r, p, γi and function Φ : S → R, changing the reward function of M to

                           r0 (s, a, s0 ) = r(s, a, s0 ) + γΦ(s0 ) − Φ(s)                  (7)

will not change the set of optimal policies. Thus, if we find a function Φ – referred to as a
potential function – that allows us to learn optimal policies more quickly, we are guaranteed
that the found policies are still optimal with respect to the original reward function.
    In this section, we consider the use of value iteration over the RM states as a way
to compute a potential function. Intuitively, the idea is to approximate the expected dis-
counted return of being in any RM state by treating the RM itself as an MDP. As a result, a
potential will be assigned to each RM state over which equation (7) will be used to define a
shaped reward function that will encourage the agent to make progress towards solving the
task. This method works only for simple reward machines since it does not use information
from the environment states S and actions A.
    Formally, given a simple RM hU, u0 , F, δu , δr i, we construct an MDP M = hS, A, r, p, γi,
where S = U ∪ F , A = 2P , r(u, σ, u0 ) = δr (u, σ) if u ∈ U (zero otherwise), γ < 1, and
                                    
                                    1
                                            if u ∈ F and u0 = u
                           0
                        p(u |u, σ) = 1       if u ∈ U and u0 = δu (u, σ)                   (8)
                                    
                                     0       otherwise
                                    

Intuitively, this is an MDP where every transition in the RM corresponds to a deterministic
action. We can then compute the value of each state v ∗ (u) = maxσ q ∗ (u, σ) in this MDP
when using the optimal policy, using a method such as value iteration. This is shown for a
given U , F , P, δu , δr , and γ in Algorithm 4. Here, the computed state-value estimates v are
guaranteed to be equal to v ∗ by the well-known convergence properties of value iteration.
    Once we have computed v ∗ , we then define the potential function as Φ(s, u) = −v ∗ (u)
for every environment state s and RM state u. As we will see below, the use of negation
encourages the agent to transition towards RM states that correspond to task completion.
    To make this approach clearer, consider the example task of delivering coffee to the
office while avoiding decorations from Figure 1b. What makes this task difficult for an
RL agent is the sparsity of the reward. The agent only gets a +1 reward by completing
the whole task. Recall that one of the typical goals of reward shaping is to provide some
intermediate rewards as the agent gets closer to completing the task. In this case, passing

                                                186
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Algorithm 4 Value iteration for automated reward shaping
 1: Input: U , F , P, δu , δr , γ
 2: for u ∈ U ∪ F do
 3:   v(u) ← 0 {initializing v-values}
 4: e ← 1
 5: while e > 0 do
 6:   e←0
 7:   for u ∈ U do
 8:     v 0 ← max{δr (u, σ) + γv(δu (u, σ)) | ∀σ ∈ 2P }
 9:     e = max{e, |v(u) − v 0 |}
10:     v(u) ← v 0
11: return v



                          h¬K ∧ ¬[, 0+0.09i          h¬o ∧ ¬[, 0+0.1i

                              hK ∧ ¬[, 0 + 0i               ho ∧ ¬[, 1+1i
            start     -0.9                         -1.0

                          h[, 0+0.9i                 h[, 0+1i


                     Figure 3: Reward shaping example with γ = 0.9.



this simple reward machine through Algorithm 4 with γ = 0.9 results in the potential-based
function shown in Figure 3. In the figure, nodes represent RM states, and each state has
been labelled with the computed potential in red (the potential of terminal states is always
zero). Each transition has also been labelled by a pair hc, r + rsi, where c is a logical
condition to transition between the states, r is the reward that the agent receives for the
transition according to δr , and rs is the extra reward given by equation (7). Note that,
with reward shaping, the agent is given a reward of 0.09 for self-looping before getting a
coffee and a reward of 0.1 for self-looping after getting the coffee. This gives an incentive
for collecting coffee and, as such, making progress on the overall task. In addition, we know
that the optimal policy is preserved since we are using equation (7) to shape the rewards.
    Finally, we would like to make two observations about this approach. First, the poten-
tials of all terminal states are set to zero and, thus, moving to any terminal state will give
a positive reward to the agent (as long as the RM has non-negative rewards only), even if
that terminal state is a bad terminal state. For instance, the agent will receive a reward of
0.9 or 1.0 when breaking a decoration in Figure 3. Unfortunately, we cannot define different
potentials for good and bad terminal states because potential-based reward shaping works
under the assumption that the potentials of all terminal states are set to the same value (Ng
et al., 1999). The second observation is that we are computing the potentials by solving
a deterministic MDP using value iteration. However, there exist faster methods to solve
deterministic MDPs (e.g., Post & Ye, 2015; Bertram et al., 2018).

                                             187
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




                             Table 1: Tasks for the office world.

      #    Description
      1    deliver coffee to the office without breaking any decoration
      2    deliver mail to the office without breaking any decoration
      3    patrol locations A, B, C, and D, without breaking any decoration
      4    deliver a coffee and the mail to the office without breaking any decoration


5. Experimental Evaluation
In this section, we provide an empirical evaluation of our methods in domains with a variety
of characteristics: discrete states, continuous states, and continuous action spaces. Some
domains include multitask learning and single task learning. Most of the tasks considered
have been expressed using simple reward machines, though those used in Section 5.3 require
the full formulation as we describe below. As a brief summary, our results show the following:

  1. CRM and HRM outperform the cross-product baselines in all our experiments.
  2. CRM converges to the best policies in all but one experiment.
  3. HRM tends to initially learn faster than CRM but converges to suboptimal policies.
  4. The gap between CRM/HRM and the cross-product baseline increases when learning
     in a multitask setting.
  5. Reward shaping helps in discrete domains but it does not in continuous domains.

5.1 Results on Discrete Domains
We evaluated our methods on two gridworlds. Since these are tabular domains, we use
tabular Q-learning as the core off-policy learning method for all the approaches. Specifically,
we tested Q-learning alone over the cross-product (QL), Q-learning with reward shaping
(QL+RS), Q-learning with counterfactual experiences (CRM), Q-learning with CRM and
reward shaping (CRM+RS), and our hierarchical RL method with and without reward
shaping (HRM and HRM+RS). We do not report results for QRM since it is equivalent to
CRM in tabular domains. We use  = 0.1 for exploration, γ = 0.9, and α = 0.5. We also
used optimistic initialization of the Q-values by setting the initial Q-value of any state-action
pair to be 2. For the hierarchical RL methods, we use r+ = 1 and r− = 0.
    The first domain is the office world described in Section 3 and Figure 1a. This is a
multitask domain, consisting of the four tasks described in Table 1. We begin by evaluating
how long it takes the agents to learn a policy that can solve those four tasks. The agent
will iterate through the tasks, changing from one to the next at the completion of each
episode. Note that CRM and HRM are good fits for this problem setup because they can
use experience from solving one task to update the policies for solving the other tasks.
    We ran 60 independent trials and report the average reward per step across the four
tasks in Figure 4-left. We normalized the average reward per step to be 1 for an optimal
policy (which we pre-computed using value iteration) and show the median performance
over those 60 runs, as well as the 25th and 75th percentiles in the shadowed area. The re-
sults show that CRM and CRM+RS quickly learn to optimally solve all the tasks – largely

                                              188
                          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




                        Office World (multiple tasks)                                       Office World (single task)

                                                         1                                                                 1




 Avg. reward per step                                                Avg. reward per step
                                                         0.8                                                               0.8
                                                         0.6                                                               0.6

                                                         0.4                                                               0.4

                                                         0.2                                                               0.2

                                                         0                                                                 0
                          20      40      60    80                                           10    20    30     40   50   60
                        Training steps (in thousands)                                       Training steps (in thousands)

                          QL       HRM         CRM           QL+RS                              HRM+RS          CRM+RS

                                         Figure 4: Results on the office gridworld.



outperforming the cross-product baseline (QL). HRM also outperforms QL and initially
learns faster than CRM, but converges to suboptimal policies. Finally, we note that adding
reward shaping improves the performance of CRM and QL but decreases the performance
of HRM. We are not certain about why reward shaping decreases the performance of HRM.
Some further experiments showed that HRM+RS can slightly outperform HRM under cer-
tain combinations of values for r+ and Q-value initialization. However, HRM outperforms
HRM+RS under most hyperparameter selections, just as reported in Figure 4.
    We also ran a single-task experiment in the office world. We took the hardest task
available (task 4), and ran 60 new independent runs where the agent had to solve only that
task. The results are shown in Figure 4-right. We note that CRM still outperforms the
other methods, though the gap between CRM and QL decreased. HRM learns faster than
CRM (without reward shaping), but is overtaken since it converges to a suboptimal policy.
    Our second tabular domain is the Minecraft-like gridworld introduced by Andreas et al.
(2017). In this world, the grid contains raw materials that the agent can extract and use
to make new objects. Andreas et al. defined 10 tasks to solve in this world that consist of
making an object by following a sequence of sub-goals (called a sketch). For instance, the
task make a bridge consists of get iron, get wood, and use factory. We note that sketches
require a total ordering of the subgoals. For instance, we could define a sketch for the above
example that would require the agent first get iron and then get wood, or we can define a
sketch that requires the agent to get wood and then get iron. However, sketches do not allow
for interleaving subtasks, which would allow an agent to decide to achieve different subgoals
in whatever order they see fit. Reward machines do allow for such partially ordered tasks
and, as such, we removed any unnecessary orderings when encoding these tasks as reward
machines for our experiments. For example, the reward machine for the above task would

                                                               189
                                   Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Table 2: Tasks for the Minecraft domain. Each task is described as a sequence of events.

            #           Task name      Description
            1           make plank     get wood, use toolshed
            2           make stick     get wood, use workbench
            3           make cloth     get grass, use factory
            4           make rope      get grass, use toolshed
            5           make bridge    get iron, get wood, use factory
                                       (the iron and wood can be gotten in any order)
                    6   make bed       get wood, use toolshed, get grass, use workbench
                                       (the grass can be gotten at any time before using the workbench)
                    7   make axe       get wood, use workbench, get iron, use toolshed
                                       (the iron can be gotten at any time before using the toolshed)
                    8   make shears    get wood, use workbench, get iron, use workbench
                                       (the iron can be gotten at any time before using the workbench)
                    9   get gold       get iron, get wood, use factory, use bridge
                                       (the iron and wood can be gotten in any order)
        10              get gem        get wood, use workbench, get iron, use toolshed, use axe
                                       (the iron can be gotten at any time before using the toolshed)


                        Craft World (multiple tasks)                                          Craft World (single task)

                                                          1                                                                  1




 Avg. reward per step                                                 Avg. reward per step
                                                          0.8                                                                0.8

                                                          0.6                                                                0.6

                                                          0.4                                                                0.4

                                                          0.2                                                                0.2

                                                          0                                                                  0
                            500     1,000    1,500                                               500     1,000    1,500
                        Training steps (in thousands)                                        Training steps (in thousands)

                          QL       HRM          CRM           QL+RS                              HRM+RS           CRM+RS

                                      Figure 5: Results on the Minecraft-like gridworld.


allow for get wood and get iron to be done in any order. The original tasks and the partial
orderings allowed in the new encodings are shown in Table 2.
    Figure 5 shows performance over 10 randomly generated maps, with 6 trials per map.
We report results for multitask and single task learning. From these results, we can draw
similar conclusions as for the office world. However, notice that the gap between methods

                                                                190
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




                                     ho/w, 0i             ho/w, 0i            ho/w, 0i

                                                 hR, 0i              hG, 0i              hB, 1i
                                        u0                  u1                  u2
                                             hG ∧ ¬R, 0i         hR ∧ ¬G, 0i         hR ∧ ¬B, 0i
                                             hB ∧ ¬R, 0i         hB ∧ ¬G, 0i         hG ∧ ¬B, 0i
                                             hC ∧ ¬R, 0i         hC ∧ ¬G, 0i         hC ∧ ¬B, 0i
                                             hY ∧ ¬R, 0i         hY ∧ ¬G, 0i         hY ∧ ¬B, 0i
                                             hM ∧ ¬R, 0i         hM ∧ ¬G, 0i         hM ∧ ¬B, 0i



Figure 6: Water world domain and an examplary task. The events R, G, B, C, Y, and M
represent touching a red ball, green ball, blue ball, cyan ball, yellow ball, and magenta ball,
respectively. The label o/w stands for otherwise. The RM encodes task 10 from Table 3.


that exploit the structure of the reward machine (CRM and HRM) and methods that do
not (QL) is much larger in the Minecraft domain. The reason is that the Minecraft domain
is more complex and the reward sparser – making the use of Q-learning alone hopeless.
    Overall, the results on these two domains show that exploiting the RM structure can
greatly increase the performance in tabular domains for single task and multitask learning.
CRM seems to be the best compromise between performance and convergence guarantees.
HRM can find good policies quickly, but it often converges to suboptimal solutions. Finally,
note that reward shaping helped CRM and Q-learning but did not help HRM.

5.2 Results on Continuous State Domains
We tested our approaches in a continuous state space problem called the water world (Sidor,
2016; Karpathy, 2015). This environment consists of a two dimensional box with balls of
different colors in it (see Figure 6 for an example). Each ball moves in one direction at a
constant speed and bounces when it collides with the box’s edges. The agent, represented
by a white ball, can increase its velocity in any of the four cardinal directions. As the ball
positions and velocities are real numbers, this domain cannot be tackled using tabular RL.
    We defined a set of 10 tasks for the water world over the events of touching a ball of
a certain color. For instance, one simple task consists of touching a cyan ball after a blue
ball. Other more complicated tasks include touching a sequence of balls, such as red, green,
and blue, in a strict order, such that the agent fails if it touches a ball of a different color
than the next one in the sequence. The complete list of tasks can be found in Table 3.
    In these experiments, we replaced Q-learning with Double DQN. Concretely, we eval-
uated double DQN over the cross-product (DDQN), DDQN with counterfactual experi-
ences (CRM), our hierarchical RL method (HRM), and their variants using reward shaping
(DDQN+RS, CRM+RS, and HRM+RS). For all approaches other than HRM, we used a
feed-forward network with 3 hidden layers and 1024 relu units per layer. We trained the
networks using a learning rate of 10−5 . On every step, we updated the Q-functions using
32n sampled experiences from a replay buffer of size 50000n, where n = 1 for DDQN and

                                                191
                                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Table 3: Tasks for the water world. By “(color1 then color2)” we mean the task of touching
a ball of color1 and then touching a ball of color2. A task like “(color1 then color2 then
color3)” is similar but with three types of balls to touch. By “(subtask1) and (subtask2)”
we mean that the agent must complete the tasks described by subtask1 and subtask2, but
in any order. By “(color1 strict-then color2)” we mean the task which is like “(color1 then
color2)” but where the agent is not allowed to touch balls of other colors during execution.

                           #    Description
                            1   (red then green)
                            2   (blue then cyan)
                            3   (magenta then yellow)
                            4   (red then green) and (blue then cyan)
                            5   (blue then cyan) and (magenta then yellow)
                            6   (red then green) and (magenta then yellow)
                            7   (red then green) and (blue then cyan) and (magenta then yellow)
                            8   (red then green then blue) and (cyan then magenta then yellow)
                            9   (cyan strict-then magenta strict-then yellow)
                           10   (red strict-then green strict-then blue)


                        Water World (multiple tasks)                                       Water World (single task)

                                                        0.8                                                                1




 Avg. reward per step                                               Avg. reward per step
                                                                                                                           0.8
                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                        0.4                                                                0.4

                                                        0.2                                                                0.2

                                                                                                                           0
                            500     1,000    1,500                                             500     1,000    1,500
                        Training steps (in thousands)                                      Training steps (in thousands)

                        DDQN         HRM       CRM        DDQN+RS                                 HRM+RS          CRM+RS

                                       Figure 7: Results in the water world domain.


n = |U | for CRM. The target networks were updated every 100 training steps and the
discount factor γ was 0.9. For HRM, we use the same feed-forward network and hyperpa-
rameters to train the option’s policies (although n = |A| in this case). The high-level policy
was learned using DDQN but, since the high-level decision problem is simpler, we used a
smaller network (2 layers with 256 relu units) and a larger learning rate (10−3 ). Our DDQN
implementation was based on the code from OpenAI Baselines (Hesse et al., 2017).

                                                              192
                          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




                        Water World (multiple tasks)

                                                        0.8




 Avg. reward per step
                                                        0.6           Legend:
                                                                         QRM
                                                                         CRM (3L/1024N)
                                                        0.4              CRM (3L/512N)
                                                                         CRM (3L/256N)
                                                        0.2              CRM (6L/64N)



                            500     1,000    1,500
                        Training steps (in thousands)

                                      Figure 8: Results in the water world domain.


    We ran experiments in multitask and single task settings. In the multitask setting, all
the approaches learned one policy (i.e., network) to solve all the tasks. Figure 7 shows the
results on 10 randomly generated water world maps, with 2 trials per map. We normalized
the average reward per step using the run that got the highest average reward across all
the approaches. In the multitask experiments, CRM performs the best. HRM initially
learns faster than CRM but converged to suboptimal policies and adding reward shaping
decreased the performance of all the approaches. In the single task experiment, we evaluated
the performance of all the approaches when trying to solve task 10 only (see Table 3). In
this case, CRM also converged to better policies.
    Finally, we compare the performance of CRM and QRM. As discussed in Section 4.2,
CRM and QRM are not equivalent when using function approximation. The most notable
difference is that CRM uses a large network to learn a single policy π(a|s, u) for all RM
states whereas QRM uses a set of small networks, one to learn a policy πu (a|s) for each
RM state u ∈ U . The results in Figure 8 show that CRM and QRM have comparable
performance on the water world. However, to do so CRM requires using a larger network.
In this experiment, QRM is learning networks of 6 layers with 64 relu units (6L/64N) –
which are the same size as the networks used by Toro Icarte et al. (2018c). To get to the
same performance as QRM, CRM has to use a network of 3 layers with 1024 relu units per
layer. We leave it to future work to further investigate the trade-offs of using multiple small
networks to solve a task (as in QRM) versus one network per task (as in CRM). That said,
CRM has the added advantage of being trivial to implement. In fact, we do not have results
for QRM in the next section because it is unclear how to integrate QRM with DDPG.

5.3 Results on Continuous Control Tasks
Our final set of experiments considers the case where the action space is continuous. We
ran experiments on the HalfCheetah-v3 environment (Brockman et al., 2016), shown in

                                                              193
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




A                              B              C               D              E              F




Figure 9: HalfCheetah-v3 domain. The first task consists of going from A to B and back
as many times as possible. The second task consists of reaching F as soon as possible.


Figure 9. In this environment, the agent is a cheetah-like robot. This agent has 6 joints
that it must learn to control in order to move forward or backwards. At each time step, the
agent chooses how much force to apply to each joint, making the action space infinite. The
state space is also continuous, including the location and velocities of each joint.
    We evaluated the performance of our approaches in two tasks (independently). All the
approaches use DDPG as the underlying off-policy learning approach. In the case of HRL,
the option policies are learned using DDPG but the high-level policy uses DQN. All the
approaches use a feed-forward network with 2 layers and 256 relu units per layer. The batch
size was 100n (where n = 1 in DDPG, n = |U | in CRM, and n = |A| in HRM) and the rest
of the hyperparameters were set to their default values (Hesse et al., 2017).
    Figure 10-left shows average results over 20 runs for the first task. This task consists of
moving back and forth from point A to point B (shown in Figure 9) as many times as possible
given a time limit of 1000 steps. The corresponding reward machine gives a reward of 1000
every time the agent completes a lap. The agent also receives a small control penalization
on every step – which is a standard penalization that discourages the agent from applying
large forces into its joints (it is a quadratic penalization over the agent’s actions).
    We note that this is a continuing task, and is also an example of a reward machine with
loops and no terminal states. The inclusion of the control penalty means that the reward
received depends on the current state, not just the reward machine transition taken. This
task – as well as the second used in this section – is therefore not specified as a simple RM.
    The results show that CRM largely outperforms the other approaches, completing 9 laps
on average by the end of learning. HRM also performs well, completing around 6 laps per
episode by the end of learning. As before, the problem with HRM is that it optimizes for
reaching the next subgoal (A or B) without considering what has to be done next. While
CRM learns to slow down before reaching A or B so it can quickly jump back afterwards,
HRM learns to run full speed until reaching A or B and, as a result, keeps advancing a few
steps before being able to slow down and start moving in the opposite direction.
    Note that the strength of CRM relies on being able to effectively share experience among
different RM states. Being able to achieve one task while trying to achieve a different one
(for example, reaching point A while trying to get to point B) allows CRM to learn efficiently.
If that sort of behaviour cannot happen, then CRM would not help much since the shared

                                             194
                          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




                           Half-Cheetah (task 1)                                              Half-Cheetah (task 2)


                                                           8




  Avg. reward per step                                               Avg. reward per step
                                                                                                                                10
                                                           6

                                                           4                                                                    5

                                                           2

                                                           0                                                                    0

                          500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500                                        500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
                         Training steps (in thousands)                                      Training steps (in thousands)

                         DDPG        HRM         CRM           DDPG+RS                              HRM+RS          CRM+RS

                                    Figure 10: Results in the HalfCheetah-v3 domain.

                         h¬B, CPi       h¬C, CPi         h¬D, CPi                           h¬E, CPi       h¬F, CPi


 start                      u0              u1             u2                                  u3              u4
                                  hB, CPi        hC, CPi             hD, CPi                         hE, CPi        hF, 1000i

Figure 11: Reward machine for the second task on the HalfCheetah-v3 domain. CP repre-
sents the control penalty usually used in this domain.


experience would not provide new insights into how to solve the problem. In contrast, HRM
performs the best in tasks where its problem decomposition preserves optimal policies. To
provide a complete view of the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches, we designed
a second task for HalfCheetah-v3 that is ideal for HRM and difficult for CRM.
     This second task consists of reaching F (shown in Figure 9) and it is represented by
the RM from Figure 11. This RM is a chain of 6 states that advances as the agent reaches
B, C, D, E, and F. The agent gets a reward of 1000 when it reaches F and the control
penalization (CP) otherwise. This is a challenging task for DDPG because the reward is
very sparse. Adding CRM can make the reward less sparse if the probability that some RM
state gets a positive reward increases by adding counterfactual experiences. This was the
case in the first task, but it is not in this second task. On the other hand, HRM is a good
fit for this problem for two reasons. First, the reward is less sparse for HRM since the agent
gets some reward signal every time B, C, D, E, or F are reached. And second, the policy
that results from composing optimal option policies is close to globally optimal.
     The average results over 20 runs for the second task are shown in Figure 10-right. As
expected, HRM is the approach that performs best, as it is able to reach F in less than 90

                                                               195
                   Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




steps. Interestingly, adding CRM to DDPG did help a bit, allowing the agent to reach F in
120 steps in some runs, but its performance was unreliable.

5.4 Runtime Comparison
The strong sample efficiency of CRM and HRM comes with a caveat, though. These two
approaches are more computationally expensive than the cross-product baseline. In fact,
Table 4 shows the average runtime for each approach in our domains. Generally speaking,
the most computationally expensive approach is HRM followed by CRM (and there is almost
no difference between adding or not reward shaping). The results on the Office and Craft
domains were computed using one core on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6148 processor. The
results on the Water and Half-Cheetah domains were computed using one Tesla P100 GPU.
     These results are not surprising. In tabular RL, CRM performs one Q-update per
RM state and HRM performs one Q-update per RM edge in every iteration. In contrast,
the cross-product baseline performs only one Q-update per iteration. In the case of deep
RL, CRM and HRM have the overhead of creating the counterfactual experiences, adding
them to the replay buffer, and updating the network’s weights using larger mini-batches.
Note that a reason CRM and HRM have more overhead in the multitask setting is that
counterfactual experiences are generated for every state in every task, not just the current
task.
     The good news is that the Q-updates performed by CRM and HRM can be done in
parallel to reduce their runtimes. In fact, our implementations of CRM and HRM with
deep RL exploit some degree of parallelism as the computation of gradients using larger
mini-batches is parallelized by TensorFlow. Therefore, the gap between the cross-product
baseline, CRM, and HRM, can be reduced by using a stronger GPU.
     Finally, note that the advantages of using CRM or HRM go beyond improving sample
efficiency. They decrease the sparsity of the reward signal and, as such, CRM and HRM
might find good policies in problems where the cross-product baseline would have a hard
time just finding any reward. This is the case for task 1 in the Half-Cheetah environment
and its consequence is that the cross-product baseline is unlikely to solve such a problem
regardless of how long it runs. In fact, we ran DDPG for 30 millions steps (over 3 days of
computation) and was still unable to find a better-than-random policy for task 1.

5.5 Code
Our code is available at github.com/RodrigoToroIcarte/reward_machines, including our
environments, raw results, and implementations of the cross-product baseline, automated
reward shaping, CRM, and HRM using tabular Q-learning, DDQN, and DDPG. For the ex-
periments with QRM, we use the following implementation: bitbucket.org/RToroIcarte/
qrm. Our methods are fully integrated with the OpenAI Gym API (Brockman et al., 2016).

6. Related Work
In this section, we discuss existing works on the topic of reward machines and how this
paper fits within that body of literature. We then discuss how reward machines relate more
generally with approaches for reward specifications and knowledge exploitation in RL.

                                            196
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Table 4: Runtime comparison. We use CP to denote the cross-product baseline (which is
either Q-learning, DDQN, or DDPG, depending on the domain). The setup can be ST
(single task), MT (multiple tasks), T1 (task 1), or T2 (task 2). We report average runtime
and its standard deviation across all random seeds and maps per domain and approach.

    Domain       Setup     CP        CP+RS          HRM        HRM+RS         CRM        CRM+RS
  Office World   ST      2.5 ± 0.1   3.3 ± 0.1    16.1 ± 0.5   17.7 ± 0.4   11.9 ± 0.3   12.1 ± 0.4
  (in seconds)   MT      2.9 ± 0.1   3.7 ± 0.1    38.6 ± 0.5   40.6 ± 0.7   32.1 ± 0.9   32.3 ± 0.9
  Craft World    ST      0.9 ± 0.0   1.1 ± 0.0     8.8 ± 0.2    9.4 ± 0.4    6.3 ± 0.1    6.4 ± 0.3
  (in minutes)   MT      1.3 ± 0.0   1.6 ± 0.0    62.4 ± 1.5   64.1 ± 2.4   49.2 ± 2.5   50.3 ± 2.2
 Water World     ST      3.1 ± 0.1   3.0 ± 0.1     3.8 ± 0.2    3.7 ± 0.2    3.4 ± 0.2    3.5 ± 0.2
  (in hours)     MT      3.1 ± 0.2   3.1 ± 0.1    37.1 ± 3.0   36.4 ± 2.8   23.4 ± 2.8   21.1 ± 0.4
 Half-Cheetah     T1     7.7 ± 0.1   6.9 ± 0.5     5.2 ± 0.2    4.8 ± 0.5    6.4 ± 0.2    6.2 ± 0.8
  (in hours)      T2     7.1 ± 0.7   6.8 ± 0.5     5.7 ± 0.2    6.3 ± 0.5    7.4 ± 0.6    6.9 ± 0.4



6.1 Reward Machine Research
We originally proposed reward machines in an ICML publication (Toro Icarte et al., 2018c).
At that time, there had also been work on using Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) or related
languages to reward agents in MDPs (e.g., Bacchus et al., 1996; Lacerda et al., 2014, 2015;
Camacho et al., 2017; Brafman et al., 2018) and RL (e.g., Aksaray et al., 2016; Littman
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017, 2018; Hasanbeig et al., 2018). A popular approach was to
translate the LTL specification into a finite state machine, reward the agent when the
machine hits an accepting state, and learn policies using the cross-product baseline. In
contrast, prior to our reward machine work, we had proposed a novel approach to RL
with LTL rewards, called LPOPL, that did not exploit automata but rather exploited
the structure of LTL natively to learn policies faster than existing methods (Toro Icarte
et al., 2018b). LPOPL is QRM’s predecessor as it relies on the same learning principle: It
decomposes the LTL tasks into many subtasks and learns policies for them in parallel via
off-policy learning.
     The main contributions of our ICML paper were to introduce RMs and QRM (Toro
Icarte et al., 2018c). QRM generalizes LPOPL and also outperforms the cross-product
baseline and Hierarchical RL. Since then, RMs have been used for solving problems in
planning (Illanes et al., 2019, 2020), robotics (Shah et al., 2020; Shah & Shah, 2020; DeFazio
& Zhang, 2021; Camacho et al., 2020, 2021), multi-agent systems (Neary et al., 2021),
lifelong RL (Zheng et al., 2021), and partial observability (Toro Icarte et al., 2019a). De
Giacomo et al. (2020) also considered both Mealy and Moore versions of RMs, though theirs
only output numbers (like our simple RMs) instead of reward functions. Finally, there has
been prominent work on how to learn RMs from experience (e.g., Toro Icarte et al., 2019a,
2019b, 2021; Xu et al., 2020a, 2020b; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2020a, 2020b; Rens & Raskin,
2020; Hasanbeig et al., 2021; Velasquez et al., 2021)
     Since our previous work, we have gained practical experience and new theoretical insights
about reward machines – which were reflected in this paper. In particular, we provided a
cleaner definition of reward machines and QRM. On the RM side, we changed δr from

                                                 197
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




returning a reward function on each transition to returning a reward function on each
state (i.e., changed from a Mealy to Moore formulation). As discussed in Section 3, this
is as expressive as before but simpler. We also added terminal states to reward machines
because terminal states naturally arise in most practical applications. On the QRM side,
we proposed CRM as a novel view of QRM that is simpler to understand and implement.
Another improvement was the addition of HRM. In our ICML paper, hierarchical RL was a
baseline. We hand-picked the set of options and learned policies following recommendations
from Sutton et al. (1999) and Kulkarni et al. (2016). The key difference between HRM and
our previous HRL baseline is that HRM automatically extracts the set of options from the
reward machine. Our new experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach,
and thus we consider HRM itself to be a general HRL-based method for solving MDPRMs.
     The experimental evaluation in this paper also improves upon that first described in
the original reward machine work. First, we have used a better performance metric: the
average reward per step instead of the normalized discounted reward (see discussion below).
Second, we have added experiments on a continuous control environment. These are the
first known results on continuous control for reward machines. And third, we include
single-task experiments. Our ICML paper only had multitask experiments, which created
the misconception that QRM only worked for multitask learning. We addressed those
concerns in this paper. Finally, we reimplemented our code and made it fully compatible
with OpenAI Gym. We hope this will facilitate future research on reward machines.

6.1.1 Average Reward Per Step vs Normalized Discounted Return

The reason to prefer average reward per step (ARPS) over normalized discounted reward
(NDR) is that NDR is a metric that penalizes suboptimal steps exponentially and depends
on the chosen value of γ. For instance, let’s consider problems that gives a reward of 1
for completing a task and zero otherwise (as in most of our experiments). Imagine that
an optimal policy solves a certain task in 100 steps and that HRM, which converges to
suboptimal solutions, solves it in 104 steps. Then, the NDR performance of HRM will
be γ 4 . Meanwhile, the performance of CRM will converge to 1.0 since CRM converges to
optimal policies in tabular domains. The problem with NDR is that γ 4 can go from zero
to one depending on the value of γ. If γ = 0.9, the HRM performance will be 0.66. If
γ = 0.8, it will be 0.41. In contrast, the ARPS performance of HRM will always be 0.96 in
this experiment, regardless of the value of γ. This makes ARPS results easier to interpret
than the NDR in our setting.

6.2 Reward Specification

There has been significant interest in using formal languages to specify tasks, constraints,
and advice in reinforcement learning (e.g., Li et al., 2017; Littman et al., 2017; Toro Icarte
et al., 2017, 2018a, 2018b; Hasanbeig et al., 2018, 2019a, 2019a, 2019b, 2019b, 2020, 2020; Li
& Belta, 2019; Li et al., 2019; Ringstrom & Schrater, 2019; Quint et al., 2019; Jothimurugan
et al., 2019; Bozkurt et al., 2020; Koroglu & Sen, 2019; Gaon & Brafman, 2020; Yuan et al.,
2019; Shah et al., 2020; Shah & Shah, 2020; Ghasemi et al., 2020; De Giacomo et al., 2020;
Li, 2020; Leon et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021; Bozkurt et al., 2021; Hammond et al., 2021;

                                             198
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Luo & Zavlanos, 2021; Araki et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2021; Vaezipoor et al., 2021). We hope
to see more research in this direction in the next years.
    The use of formal languages may facilitate specification of reward functions for RL in
complex systems. Further, formal languages typically have compositional structure that
RL agents could, in principle, exploit to learn policies more efficiently. That said, creating
learning methods tailored to the myriad of languages people might wish to employ – LTL,
LDL (Linear Dynamic Logic), and so on – is labour intensive. To mitigate this, Camacho
et al. (2019) proposed specifying reward functions in the developer’s language of choice
and using reward machines as a normal form representation for learning. This allows us
to focus our efforts on two subproblems: (i) understanding how to translate particular
languages into equivalent RMs and (ii) understanding how to exploit the RM structure
to learn policies faster. We have made progress toward both problems. While this paper
presents methods for exploiting RM structure in learning, Camacho et al. (2019) present
a way of translating a number of popular formal languages into RMs by leveraging well-
understood relationships between languages and automata, and Middleton et al. (2020)
developed a tool that supports a subset of these translations.
    That said, we note that designing reward functions that lead to the intended behavior
can be difficult. The designer may neglect to penalize some undesirable changes in the
environment, resulting in policies that are optimal with respect to the specification but
that have negative side effects. More generally, the agent may find unintended ways to
maximize reward (Amodei et al., 2016). Hadfield-Menell et al. (2017) have asserted that
manually designed reward functions should merely be viewed as evidence relating to what
the designer actually intended. Reward machines in general do not address this problem,
though they may make it easier to specify temporally extended behaviors.
    Some alternatives to manually designed reward functions are demonstrations (e.g., Ng
& Russell, 2000; Abbeel & Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al., 2008; Fu et al., 2018), positive and
negative feedback (e.g., Thomaz et al., 2006; Knox & Stone, 2008; MacGlashan et al.,
2017), and trajectory preferences (e.g., Akrour et al., 2012; Christiano et al., 2017). When
using demonstrations, tasks are specified using a set of expert traces. Then, inverse rein-
forcement learning (IRL) is used to transform traces into reward functions. Positive and
negative feedback which comes from an expert who observes the agent during training is
also an alternative to specifying a reward function in advance. Trajectory preferences are
another form of feedback that require the expert to just compare trajectories created by
the agent and say which they prefer. Demonstrations and feedback are a useful proxy for
task specifications, but unlike reward machines they do not specify the task itself. Future
work could look at ways to combine demonstrations and feedback with RMs. For example,
the user could specify the graphical structure of an RM and then use IRL to learn the
state-reward function of each RM state.

6.3 Exploiting Prior Knowledge
Our approaches for exploiting RM structure are inspired by methods for exploiting prior
knowledge in RL. In particular, prior knowledge has been used for problem decomposition
(Parr & Russell, 1998; Dietterich, 2000; Mann et al., 2015), data augmentation (Andrychow-
icz et al., 2017; Pitis et al., 2020), and reward shaping (Ng et al., 1999).

                                             199
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




    Hierarchical reinforcement learning is the most successful methodology to exploit decom-
positions in RL. Some foundational HRL works include H-DYNA (Singh, 1992a), MAXQ
(Dietterich, 2000), HAMs (Parr & Russell, 1998), and Options (Sutton et al., 1999). The
role of the hierarchy is to decompose the task into a set of sub-tasks that are reusable and
easier to learn. However, these methods cannot guarantee convergence to optimal policies
because hierarchies constrain the policy space and, hence, might prune optimal policies. An
RM can be viewed as a form of hierarchy that also defines the reward function. This allows
us to define methods that can speed up learning and still guarantee convergence to optimal
policies (e.g., QRM, CRM, or RS). We also proposed HRM, which automatically extracts
an option-based hierarchy from an RM to solve MDPRMs faster (although it inherits the
possibility of convergence to suboptimal policies from the option framework).
    Singh (1992a, 1992b) proposed an alternative to HRL which defines tasks as sequences
of sub-goals. Independent policies are trained to achieve each sub-goal, and then a gating
function learns to switch from one policy to the next. The same idea was exploited by policy
sketches (Andreas et al., 2017) but without the need for an external signal when a sub-goal
is reached. In contrast, reward machines are considerably more expressive than sub-goal
sequences and sketches, as they allow for interleaving, loops, and compositions of entire
reward functions. Indeed, regular expressions can be captured in finite state machines.
    CRM exploits a similar learning principle as Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) and
Counterfactual Data Augmentation (CoDA). HER was proposed by Andrychowicz et al.
(2017) and, like CRM, relies on relabelling experiences to learn policies faster. However,
CRM relabels experiences using the RM and HER uses goal states. One advantage of CRM
is that RMs can encode temporally extended behaviours that cannot be encoded using HER,
such as reaching a goal state while avoiding some objects (tasks 9 and 10 in Section 5.2)
or loopy behaviours (task 1 in Section 5.3). That said, an advantage of HER is that it can
learn policies that generalize to unseen goal states. Currently, it is unclear how to achieve
a similar behaviour using RMs (i.e., to learn a policy that generalizes to unseen RMs).
    CRM is also related to CoDA (Pitis et al., 2020). CoDA is a recently proposed technique
for generating counterfactual experiences in RL. This approach consists of combining two
experiences to generate new counterfactual experiences by exploiting locally independent
causal factors. In contrast, CRM exploits the RM to generate multiple counterfactual
experiences from one single environment experience. Further exploring synergies between
RMs, HER, and CoDA is a promising direction for future work.
    Our method for automated reward shaping was inspired by Camacho et al. (2018).
In that work, Camacho et al. proposed an approach for automated reward shaping over
automata in service of finding a policy for a fully specified MDP with an LTL-specified
reward function. To do so, they defined a potential-based function that considered the
distance between each automata state and its closest accepting state. In this paper, we
extended Camacho et al.’s approach to work over simple reward machines.

7. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we introduced the notion of reward machines – a form of finite state machine
that can be used to specify the reward function of an RL agent. Reward machines support
the specification of arbitrary rewards, including sparse rewards and rewards for temporally

                                            200
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




extended behaviors. Reward machines expose structure in the reward function and, in doing
so, can significantly improve the sample complexity of learning, as demonstrated in our
experiments. Our methods enable us to find solutions faster and, more importantly, to solve
problems that could not otherwise be solved given limited interaction with the environment.
We proposed three different methodologies to exploit reward machine structure in learning:
automated reward shaping, counterfactual reasoning, and decomposition methods. We
discussed the convergence guarantees of these approaches in the tabular case and empirically
evaluated their effectiveness in discrete and continuous domains.
    Many questions remain open regarding reward machines. For instance, we know how to
learn reward machines from experience (Toro Icarte et al., 2019a, 2019b; Xu et al., 2020a,
2020b; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2020a, 2020b; Rens & Raskin, 2020), but all these methods
assume access to a correct labelling function. How to learn RMs and a labelling function
at the same time remains unknown. Similarly, it is unclear how to deal with noisy labelling
functions. Here, we assume that the event detectors that define the labelling function work
perfectly, but this is unrealistic in many real world problems. If we know that a detector fails
with certain probability, it is unclear what the next state of the reward machine should be.
Recently, we proposed a method that learns a policy that generalize to unseen tasks defined
in LTL (Vaezipoor et al., 2021) but we do not know how to achieve a similar behaviour
using RMs. Finally, our work focused on approaches to exploit the RM structure when
using model-free RL methods but it seems likely that similar ideas could be exploited in
model-based RL. We note that defining a differentiable version of RMs might be necessary
to make progress in all these future work directions, since it will allow us to tackle these
problems using gradient-based optimization techniques.
    Finally, we see many opportunities for using formal languages to define correct reward
specification via reward machines and defining novel RL methodologies to exploit the knowl-
edge within reward machines – resulting in agents that can understand humans’ instructions
and use them to solve problems faster. To keep pushing in this direction, it might be worth
exploring the potential benefits of ascending the Chomsky hierarchy and studying combi-
nations of reward machines with context-free and context-sensitive grammars.


Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada CIFAR AI Chairs Program, and Microsoft Re-
search. Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the Province of
Ontario, the Government of Canada through CIFAR, and companies sponsoring the Vector
Institute for Artificial Intelligence www.vectorinstitute.ai/partners. We also acknowl-
edge the rich multi-disciplinary research environment at the Schwartz Reisman Institute.
This work was done while the first author was a Ph.D. student at the University of Toronto.


References
Abbeel, P., & Ng, A. Y. (2004). Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning.
    In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).

                                              201
                    Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Akrour, R., Schoenauer, M., & Sebag, M. (2012). APRIL: Active preference learning-based
     reinforcement learning. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases
     - European Conference, ECML PKDD 2012, Vol. 7524 of Lecture Notes in Computer
     Science, pp. 116–131. Springer.
Aksaray, D., Jones, A., Kong, Z., Schwager, M., & Belta, C. (2016). Q-learning for robust
     satisfaction of signal temporal logic specifications. In Proceedings of the 55th IEEE
     Conference on on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 6565–6570.
Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P. F., Schulman, J., & Mané, D. (2016).
    Concrete problems in AI safety. CoRR, abs/1606.06565.
Andreas, J., Klein, D., & Levine, S. (2017). Modular multitask reinforcement learning
     with policy sketches. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
     Learning (ICML), pp. 166–175.
Andrychowicz, M., Wolski, F., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Fong, R., Welinder, P., McGrew, B.,
    Tobin, J., Abbeel, O. P., & Zaremba, W. (2017). Hindsight experience replay. In
    Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing
    Systems (NIPS), pp. 5048–5058.
Araki, B., Li, X., Vodrahalli, K., Decastro, J., Fry, M., & Rus, D. (2021). The logical options
     framework. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning
     (ICML), Vol. 139, pp. 307–317.
Bacchus, F., Boutilier, C., & Grove, A. J. (1996). Rewarding behaviors. In Proceedings of
     the 13th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1160–1167.
Bertram, J. R., Yang, X., & Wei, P. (2018). Fast online exact solutions for deterministic
     MDPs with sparse rewards. CoRR, abs/1805.02785.
Bozkurt, A. K., Wang, Y., & Pajic, M. (2021). Learning optimal strategies for temporal
     tasks in stochastic games. CoRR, abs/2102.04307.
Bozkurt, A. K., Wang, Y., Zavlanos, M. M., & Pajic, M. (2020). Control synthesis from
     linear temporal logic specifications using model-free reinforcement learning. In Pro-
     ceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
     (ICRA), pp. 10349–10355.
Brafman, R. I., De Giacomo, G., & Patrizi, F. (2018). LTLf/LDLf non-Markovian rewards.
     In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp.
     1771–1778.
Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J., & Zaremba,
     W. (2016). OpenAI gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540.
Cai, M., Hasanbeig, M., Xiao, S., Abate, A., & Kan, Z. (2021). Modular deep reinforcement
     learning for continuous motion planning with temporal logic. CoRR, abs/2102.12855.
Camacho, A., Chen, O., Sanner, S., & McIlraith, S. A. (2017). Non-Markovian rewards
    expressed in LTL: Guiding search via reward shaping. In Proceedings of the 10th
    Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SOCS), pp. 159–160.
Camacho, A., Chen, O., Sanner, S., & McIlraith, S. A. (2018). Non-Markovian rewards
    expressed in LTL: Guiding search via reward shaping (extended version). In 1st

                                             202
         Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




     Workshop on Goal Specifications for Reinforcement Learning. Workshop held jointly
     at ICML, IJCAI, and AAMAS 2018.
Camacho, A., Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2019).
    LTL and beyond: Formal languages for reward function specification in reinforcement
    learning. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
    telligence (IJCAI), pp. 6065–6073.
Camacho, A., Varley, J., Jain, D., Iscen, A., & Kalashnikov, D. (2020). Disentangled plan-
    ning and control in vision based robotics via reward machines. CoRR, abs/2012.14464.
Camacho, A., Varley, J., Zeng, A., Jain, D., Iscen, A., & Kalashnikov, D. (2021). Reward
    machines for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE
    International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 14284–14290.
Christiano, P. F., Leike, J., Brown, T. B., Martic, M., Legg, S., & Amodei, D. (2017). Deep
     reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
     2017, pp. 4299–4307.
De Giacomo, G., Favorito, M., Iocchi, L., Patrizi, F., & Ronca, A. (2020). Temporal logic
     monitoring rewards via transducers. In Proceedings of the 17th International Confer-
     ence on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR), pp. 860–870.
De Giacomo, G., Iocchi, L., Favorito, M., & Patrizi, F. (2019). Foundations for restraining
     bolts: Reinforcement learning with LTLf/LDLf restraining specifications. In Proceed-
     ings of the 29th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
     (ICAPS), pp. 128–136.
De Giacomo, G., Iocchi, L., Favorito, M., & Patrizi, F. (2020). Restraining bolts for rein-
     forcement learning agents.. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 13659–13662.
DeFazio, D., & Zhang, S. (2021). Learning quadruped locomotion policies with reward
    machines. CoRR, abs/2107.10969.
Dietterich, T. G. (2000). Hierarchical reinforcement learning with the MAXQ value function
      decomposition. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 13, 227–303.
Fu, J., Luo, K., & Levine, S. (2018). Learning robust rewards with adverserial inverse
     reinforcement learning. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations,
     ICLR 2018. OpenReview.net.
Furelos-Blanco, D., Law, M., Jonsson, A., Broda, K., & Russo, A. (2020a). Induction and
      exploitation of subgoal automata for reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2009.03855.
Furelos-Blanco, D., Law, M., Russo, A., Broda, K., & Jonsson, A. (2020b). Induction
      of subgoal automata for reinforcement learning.. In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI
      Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3890–3897.
Gaon, M., & Brafman, R. (2020). Reinforcement learning with non-Markovian rewards.
     In Proceedings of the 34th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp.
     3980–3987.

                                           203
                   Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Ghasemi, M., Bulgur, E. A., & Topcu, U. (2020). Task-oriented active perception and
     planning in environments with partially known semantics. In Proceedings of the 37th
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Hadfield-Menell, D., Milli, S., Abbeel, P., Russell, S. J., & Dragan, A. D. (2017). Inverse
     reward design. In Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Advances in Neural Infor-
     mation Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 6765–6774.
Hammond, L., Abate, A., Gutierrez, J., & Wooldridge, M. (2021). Multi-agent reinforcement
    learning with temporal logic specifications. In Proceedings of the 20th International
    Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 583–592.
Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., & Kroening, D. (2018). Logically-constrained reinforcement
     learning. CoRR, abs/1801.08099.
Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., & Kroening, D. (2019a). Certified reinforcement learning with
     logic guidance. CoRR, abs/1902.00778.
Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., & Kroening, D. (2019b). Logically-constrained neural fitted Q-
     iteration. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
     and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 2012–2014.
Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., & Kroening, D. (2020). Cautious reinforcement learning with log-
     ical constraints. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous
     Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 483–491.
Hasanbeig, M., Jeppu, N. Y., Abate, A., Melham, T., & Kroening, D. (2021). DeepSynth:
     Automata synthesis for automatic task segmentation in deep reinforcement learning.
     In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp.
     7647–7656.
Hasanbeig, M., Kantaros, Y., Abate, A., Kroening, D., Pappas, G. J., & Lee, I. (2019a).
     Reinforcement learning for temporal logic control synthesis with probabilistic satis-
     faction guarantees. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE Conference on on Decision and
     Control (CDC), pp. 5338–5343.
Hasanbeig, M., Kroening, D., & Abate, A. (2019b). Towards verifiable and safe model-free
     reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Artificial Intelligence
     and Formal Verification, Logic, Automata, and Synthesis (OVERLAY), pp. 1–9.
Hasanbeig, M., Kroening, D., & Abate, A. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning with tem-
     poral logics. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Formal Modeling
     and Analysis of Timed Systems (FORMATS), pp. 1–22.
Hesse, C., Plappert, M., Radford, A., Schulman, J., Sidor, S., & Wu, Y. (2017). OpenAI
     baselines. https://github.com/openai/baselines.
Hopcroft, J. E., & Ullman, J. D. (1979). Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages and
     Computation. Addison-Wesley.
Illanes, L., Yan, X., Toro Icarte, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2019). Symbolic planning and
      model-free reinforcement learning: Training taskable agents. In Proceedings of the 4th
      Multi-disciplinary Conference on Reinforcement Learning and Decision (RLDM), pp.
      191–195.

                                            204
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Illanes, L., Yan, X., Toro Icarte, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2020). Symbolic plans as high-
      level instructions for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International
      Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), pp. 540–550.
Jiang, Y., Bharadwaj, S., Wu, B., Shah, R., Topcu, U., & Stone, P. (2021). Temporal-logic-
      based reward shaping for continuing reinforcement learning tasks. In Proceedings of
      the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 7995–8003.
Jothimurugan, K., Alur, R., & Bastani, O. (2019). A composable specification language for
     reinforcement learning tasks. In Proceedings of the 32nd Conference on Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 13041–13051.
Karpathy, A. (2015). REINFORCEjs: WaterWorld demo.
     http://cs.stanford.edu/people/karpathy/reinforcejs/waterworld.html.
Knox, W. B., & Stone, P. (2008). Tamer: Training an agent manually via evaluative rein-
     forcement. In Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference on Development
     and Learning (ICDL), pp. 292–297.
Koroglu, Y., & Sen, A. (2019). Reinforcement learning-driven test generation for Android
     GUI applications using formal specifications. CoRR, abs/1911.05403.
Kulkarni, T. D., Narasimhan, K., Saeedi, A., & Tenenbaum, J. (2016). Hierarchical deep
     reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. In
     Proceedings of the 29th Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NIPS), pp. 3675–3683.
Lacerda, B., Parker, D., & Hawes, N. (2014). Optimal and dynamic planning for Markov de-
     cision processes with co-safe LTL specifications. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/RSJ
     International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1511–1516.
Lacerda, B., Parker, D., & Hawes, N. (2015). Optimal policy generation for partially sat-
     isfiable co-safe LTL specifications. In Proceedings of the 24th International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 1587–1593.
Leon, B. G., Shanahan, M., & Belardinelli, F. (2020). Systematic generalisation through
     task temporal logic and deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2006.08767.
Li, X. (2020). A formal methods approach to interpretability, safety and composability for
      reinforcement learning. Ph.D. thesis, Boston University.
Li, X., & Belta, C. (2019). Temporal logic guided safe reinforcement learning using control
      barrier functions. CoRR, abs/1903.09885.
Li, X., Ma, Y., & Belta, C. (2018). A policy search method for temporal logic specified
      reinforcement learning tasks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Annual American Control
      Conference (ACC), pp. 240–245.
Li, X., Serlin, Z., Yang, G., & Belta, C. (2019). A formal methods approach to interpretable
      reinforcement learning for robotic planning. Science Robotics, 4 (37).
Li, X., Vasile, C. I., & Belta, C. (2017). Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards.
      In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
      and Systems (IROS), pp. 3834–3839.

                                             205
                     Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., & Wierstra,
       D. (2016). Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Bengio, Y.,
       & LeCun, Y. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Learning
       Representations (ICLR).
Littman, M. L., Topcu, U., Fu, J., Isbell, C., Wen, M., & MacGlashan, J. (2017).
     Environment-independent task specifications via GLTL. CoRR, abs/1704.04341.
Luo, X., & Zavlanos, M. M. (2021). Temporal logic task allocation in heterogeneous multi-
     robot systems. CoRR, abs/2101.05694.
MacGlashan, J., Ho, M. K., Loftin, R. T., Peng, B., Wang, G., Roberts, D. L., Taylor,
    M. E., & Littman, M. L. (2017). Interactive learning from policy-dependent human
    feedback. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning
    (ICML), pp. 2285–2294.
Mann, T. A., Mannor, S., & Precup, D. (2015). Approximate value iteration with temporally
    extended actions. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 53, 375–438.
Middleton, J., Klassen, T. Q., Baier, J. A., & McIlraith, S. A. (2020). FL-AT: A formal
     language–automaton transmogrifier. System demonstration at The 30th International
     Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves,
     A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., Ostrovski, G., et al. (2015). Human-level control
     through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518 (7540), 529–533.
Neary, C., Xu, Z., Wu, B., & Topcu, U. (2021). Reward machines for cooperative multi-
     agent reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
     Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 934–942.
Ng, A. Y., Harada, D., & Russell, S. J. (1999). Policy invariance under reward trans-
     formations: Theory and application to reward shaping. In Proceedings of the 16th
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 278–287.
Ng, A. Y., & Russell, S. J. (2000). Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In
     Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
     663–670.
Parr, R., & Russell, S. J. (1998). Reinforcement learning with hierarchies of machines.
      In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing
      Systems (NIPS), pp. 1043–1049.
Pitis, S., Creager, E., & Garg, A. (2020). Counterfactual data augmentation using locally
       factored dynamics. Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Advances in Neural Infor-
       mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 33.
Post, I., & Ye, Y. (2015). The simplex method is strongly polynomial for deterministic
      Markov decision processes. Mathematics of Operations Research, 40 (4), 859–868.
Quint, E., Xu, D., Dogan, H., Hakguder, Z., Scott, S., & Dwyer, M. (2019). Formal language
     constraints for Markov decision processes. CoRR, abs/1910.01074.
Rens, G., & Raskin, J.-F. (2020). Learning non-Markovian reward models in MDPs. CoRR,
     abs/2001.09293.

                                               206
          Reward Machines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in RL




Ringstrom, T. J., & Schrater, P. R. (2019). Constraint satisfaction propagation: non-
     stationary policy synthesis for temporal logic planning. CoRR, abs/1901.10405.
Shah, A., Li, S., & Shah, J. (2020). Planning with uncertain specifications (PUnS). IEEE
     Robotics and Automation Letters, 5 (2), 3414–3421.
Shah, A., & Shah, J. (2020). Interactive robot training for non-Markov tasks. CoRR,
     abs/2003.02232.
Sidor, S. (2016). Reinforcement learning with natural language signals. Ph.D. thesis, Mas-
      sachusetts Institute of Technology.
Singh, S. (1992a). Reinforcement learning with a hierarchy of abstract models. In Proceed-
     ings of the 10th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 202–207.
Singh, S. (1992b). Transfer of learning by composing solutions of elemental sequential tasks.
     Machine Learning, 8 (3-4), 323–339.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998). Reinforcement learning - an introduction. Adaptive
     computation and machine learning. MIT Press.
Sutton, R. S., Precup, D., & Singh, S. (1999). Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework
     for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112 (1-2),
     181–211.
Thomaz, A. L., Hoffman, G., & Breazeal, C. (2006). Reinforcement learning with human
    teachers: Understanding how people want to teach robots. In Proceedings of the
    15th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication
    (ROMAN), pp. 352–357.
Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2017). Using advice
     in model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 3rd Multi-disciplinary
     Conference on Reinforcement Learning and Decision (RLDM), pp. 199–203.
Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2018a). Advice-based ex-
      ploration in model-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 31st Canadian
      Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Canadian AI), pp. 72–83.
Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2018b). Teaching multiple
      tasks to an RL agent using LTL. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
      on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS). 452–461.
Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., & McIlraith, S. A. (2018c). Using reward
     machines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning.
     In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
     2112–2121.
Toro Icarte, R., Waldie, E., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., Castro, M. P., & McIlraith,
     S. A. (2021). Learning reward machines: A study in partially observable reinforcement
     learning. CoRR, abs/2112.09477.
Toro Icarte, R., Waldie, E., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., Castro, M. P., & McIlraith, S. A.
      (2019a). Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learning.
      In Proceedings of the 32nd Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing
      Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 15497–15508.

                                            207
                   Toro Icarte, Klassen, Valenzano, & McIlraith




Toro Icarte, R., Waldie, E., Klassen, T. Q., Valenzano, R., Castro, M. P., & McIlraith,
     S. A. (2019b). Searching for Markovian subproblems to address partially observable
     reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 4th Multi-disciplinary Conference on
     Reinforcement Learning and Decision (RLDM), pp. 22–26.
Vaezipoor, P., Li, A., Toro Icarte, R., & McIlraith, S. (2021). LTL2Action: Generalizing LTL
     instructions for multi-task RL. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
     on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 10497–10508.
Van Hasselt, H., Guez, A., & Silver, D. (2016). Deep reinforcement learning with Double
     Q-learning. In Proceedings of the 30th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     (AAAI), pp. 2094–2100.
Velasquez, A., Beckus, A., Dohmen, T., Trivedi, A., Topper, N., & Atia, G. (2021). Learn-
     ing probabilistic reward machines from non-Markovian stochastic reward processes.
     CoRR, abs/2107.04633.
Watkins, C. J. C. H., & Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine learning, 8 (3-4), 279–292.
Xu, Z., Gavran, I., Ahmad, Y., Majumdar, R., Neider, D., Topcu, U., & Wu, B. (2020a).
     Joint inference of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning. In Pro-
     ceedings of the 30th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling
     (ICAPS), Vol. 30, pp. 590–598.
Xu, Z., Wu, B., Neider, D., & Topcu, U. (2020b). Active finite reward automaton
     inference and reinforcement learning using queries and counterexamples. CoRR,
     abs/2006.15714.
Yuan, L. Z., Hasanbeig, M., Abate, A., & Kroening, D. (2019). Modular deep reinforcement
     learning with temporal logic specifications. CoRR, abs/1909.11591.
Zheng, X., Yu, C., Chen, C., Hao, J., & Zhuo, H. H. (2021). Lifelong reinforcement learning
     with temporal logic formulas and reward machines. CoRR, abs/2111.09475.
Ziebart, B. D., Maas, A. L., Bagnell, J. A., & Dey, A. K. (2008). Maximum entropy inverse
     reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 23rd AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1433–1438.




                                            208
