                                                                         Reinforcement Learning with
                                                                         Symbolic Reward Machines

                                                                              Thomas Krug1,2 and Daniel Neider1,2
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      TU Dortmund University
                                                                    2
                                                                        Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security



                                              Abstract Reward Machines (RMs) are an established mechanism in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
                                              to represent and learn sparse, temporally extended tasks with non-Markovian rewards. RMs rely on
                                              high-level information in the form of labels that are emitted by the environment alongside the observation.




arXiv:2603.03068v1 [cs.LG] 3 Mar 2026
                                              However, this concept requires manual user input for each environment and task. The user has to create
                                              a suitable labeling function that computes the labels. These limitations lead to poor applicability in
                                              widely adopted RL frameworks. We propose Symbolic Reward Machines (SRMs) together with the
                                              learning algorithms QSRM and LSRM to overcome the limitations of RMs. SRMs consume only the
                                              standard output of the environment and process the observation directly through guards that are
                                              represented by symbolic formulas. In our evaluation, our SRM methods outperform the baseline RL
                                              approaches and generate the same results as the existing RM methods. At the same time, our methods
                                              adhere to the widely used environment definition and provide interpretable representations of the task
                                              to the user.

                                              Keywords: Reinforcement Learning · Symbolic Reward Machines · Non-Markovian Reward Functions.


                                        1   Introduction
                                        Reinforcement Learning (RL) is an established mechanism to train agents to achieve a task in an environment
                                        that only outputs a state, which is also called observation, and a reward. A function, which is called reward
                                        function, is used to generate the reward. The reward indicates how good the last move of the agent was.
                                        The reward function is Markovian in the classical definition of RL [13]. This means that the reward depends
                                        only on the last state and the action taken by the agent. However, this is for many practical tasks a critical
                                        restriction because real-world problems often consist of a sequence of steps to accomplish the task’s goal. As
                                        an example, if an agent should fill a certain machine with wood, the agent has first to collect wood before
                                        the agent can put it in the machine. To define these tasks, non-Markovian reward functions are required.
                                        Non-Markovian reward functions map state histories to rewards. In other words, they include temporal
                                        dependencies.
                                            Reward Machines (RMs) [5,14] are one approach to represent non-Markovian reward functions. Icarte
                                        et al. [5] developed QRM that uses RMs to train agents. The idea of QRM is to use one Q-table for each
                                        RM state and to store the current RM state. Thus, QRM requires the assumption that the RMs are given a
                                        priori. Furthermore, QRM accelerates the learning process by performing a multi-update step: QRM not only
                                        updates the Q-value of the current RM state but also updates the Q-values for all RM states corresponding
                                        to the observed environment state. This is possible because QRM has access to the RM and therefore knows
                                        which reward the agent would receive if the RM were in any of its other RM states. JIRP [19] lifts this
                                        assumption and infers the RM on the fly along with the policy.
                                            However, RMs generally require an extended variant of the broadly used interaction scheme between
                                        the agent and the environment. The environment has to output high-level events which are used as inputs
                                        for the RM. These high-level events are generated by a labeling function. Aside from requiring external
                                        expert knowledge, implementing the labeling function is a technical obstacle that prevents using most RL
                                        environments out of the box. Furthermore, on the one hand, the labeling function has to be highly generic for
                                        the environment to support a variety of tasks. On the other hand, it has to be specific enough for a concrete
                                        task. Consequently, the labeling function either needs to be continuously extended, or it has to be designed
to cover all possible tasks. However, both strategies result in poor usability. In addition, RMs cannot even
represent Markovian tasks without an appropriate labeling function. As an example, if you get a reward at a
specific state, the labeling function has to generate a specific high-level event for this state. Otherwise, it is
not possible to design an RM that outputs the correct reward for this state.
    We propose Symbolic Reward Machines (SRMs) to lift the requirement of the labeling function and the
deviation from the broadly used interaction scheme between the agent and the environment. SRMs provide
the ability to represent non-Markovian reward functions without an explicit labeling function. SRMs have
internal states to represent specific information, e.g., the task completion. The agent can then make decisions
based on these internal states. In contrast to RMs, SRMs do not require abstract high-level events from a
labeling function. Instead, SRMs use symbolic formulas as guards at the transitions. These guards can directly
process the environment state. On the basis of SRMs, we provide RL learning algorithms that support the
usage of SRMs. We call them QSRM and LSRM. QSRM requires the SRM as input. LSRM is an extension of
QSRM and learns the SRM in the training process. Thus, LSRM enables the possibility to learn an effective
policy end-to-end again. In this context, end-to-end refers to the ability to train from a standard environment
to an effective policy. The idea of LSRM is to learn the SRM from experiences. By learning the SRM, LSRM
provides valuable and interpretable information about the reward structure. For example, from the learned
SRM, the user gains insight into the structure of the task and obtains information about what the agent
needs to do to accomplish the task’s goal. The learned SRM provides a step for step explanation for the
task. In the evaluation part, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SRMs and our new algorithms in multiple
experiments including finite (discrete) and infinite (continuous) state spaces. In addition, we compare the
results to existing algorithms, e.g., QRM, to show the advantage of our novel methods. Furthermore, the
results demonstrate that we can train effective policies end-to-end, and thus, respect the standard definition
for RL in the case of non-Markovian reward functions.
    Beside RMs, there is further related work in the area of non-Markovian reward functions in RL. Zhou and
Li [20] introduced a concept that they also name ‘symbolic reward machines’. However, their formal definition
differs to our definition of a Symbolic Reward Machine. First, they define the guards as a set of predicates on
trajectories Ψ , where Ψ ⊆ (S × A)∗ → B. This means that a guard in a state of the SRM can access the whole
trajectory seen so far. In addition, the reward, which the SRM outputs in a state, can also depend on the
whole trajectory seen so far because they define the reward function as a set of λ-terms of type (S × A)∗ → R,
which are basically functions from a state-action sequence to a real value. These definitions of the guards
and the reward function give very strong possibilities to model the transition function and the generation of
the reward. However, it also over-complicates the transition function and the reward calculation. In theory,
they do not need the SRM if they have suitable lambda reward functions. Furthermore, they developed an
algorithm that infers values for predefined holes of a fixed SRM. The user has to specify the structure of the
SRM and the transitions with the holes. The learning algorithm does not learn the structure of the SRM, e.g.,
how many states are needed or which transitions are used. Consequently, the method cannot learn a policy
end-to-end because of the required user input. This complicates the usability of the concept and reduces
the user-friendliness, as the user must make inputs for each environment and task in order to generate a
well-suited SRM.
    Furthermore, Ardon et al. [1] published recently ‘First-Order Reward Machines’ (FORMs). According to
Ardon et al., FORMs are superior to RMs because they can generalize over object properties and can express
conditions over whole sets of objects. Thus, FORMs often need less states than RMs. This results in smaller
automatons and faster learning. However, they demonstrate the effectiveness of their method solely in small,
discrete environments. In addition, FORMs also require a labeling function that maps a specific raw state to
a so-called observable. Consequently, they are also not directly compatible to a standard environment. For
example, if we consider a value x and want to express that this value is in a certain range, FORM requires
an atom which is true if x is in the respective range. However, the specific interval has to be given a priori.
It is not possible to define an interval with variables in it and FORM infers the specific values for these
variables. Especially for infinite state space environments, e.g., continuous values for x, this is a big challenge
because there are an infinite amount of intervals that could be used. These limitations also make FORMs


                                                        2
a suboptimal choice for standard environments with non-Markovian reward functions. This holds for finite
environments, and even more for infinite ones.
    There are also more approaches to represent non-Markovian reward functions and leverage the structured
information of them [3,16,2]. However, most of the approaches relying on an environment with a labeling
function as discussed before. Consequently, they have similar challenges and limitations as RMs, QRM and
JIRP.


2    Preliminaries

In this section, we introduce the necessary background of Reinforcement Learning and Reward Machines. We
use a modified version of the ‘Office World’ as our running example throughout the paper. The Office World was
introduced by Icarte et al. [5]. We define a discrete and a continuous version of the Office World. The discrete
version is defined by the state space S = {(x, y) | x, y ∈ N0 ∧ x ≤ 14 ∧ y ≤ 10}. It is an example for a finite
environment. The continuous version is defined by the state space S = {(x, y) | x, y ∈ R≥0 ∧ x < 15 ∧ y < 11}.
It is an example for an infinite environment. Figure 1 shows the discrete version of the Office World.




Figure 1: Office World environment. The discrete version is displayed. The labeled environments output the
labels shown at the specific positions.


    A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is often used to model an environment.
Definition 1 (MDP). A Markov Decision Process is a 5-tuple M = (S, sI , A, p, R) consisting of a set of
states S, an initial state sI ∈ S, a finite set of actions A, a probabilistic transition function p : S×A×S → [0, 1],
and a reward function R : (S × A)+ × S → R.
Our definition of an MDP differs slightly from the classical definition in RL [12,6,13]. There, the reward
function is defined by R : S × A × S → R. Instead, we use an extended, generalized definition where rewards
may depend on the current trajectory (the state-action history). Note that this generalized definition captures
both Markovian and non-Markovian reward functions.
   An example of a non-Markovian task in the Office World is that the agent should accomplish the following
sub-tasks in the defined order:

 1. The robot has to move to the left inner office (label E);
 2. the robot has to visit the right inner office (label F); and
 3. the robot has to move back to the initial position (label A).


                                                         3
The agent receives a reward of 1, 2 and 10 after it reaches the respective sub-task in the right order.
The proposed RMs3 by Icarte et al. [5,14] can model this reward structure. Figure 2a shows a graphical
representation of an RM for this task. Note that the RM uses E, F, A, which are high-level events that the
environment has to output by using an explicit labeling function. Therefore, the MDP definition has to be
extended to a labeled MDP. A labeled MDP consists of an MDP, propositional symbols P (labels), and a
labeling function L : S → 2P [5,6,19]. The labeling function indicates which propositional symbols (labels)
are true or false for a given environment state.




                          (a) RM                                                (b) SRM

Figure 2: RM and SRM for the example task in the Office World. Self-loops with an output of zero are omitted
in the RM.


    The agent uses a policy to select an action to interact with the environment. A deterministic policy
π(s) : S → A directly maps a state to an action. A probabilistic policy π(a|s) : S × A → [0, 1] outputs a
probability distribution for each state. The agent can then sample an action from this distribution. Based on
an MDP and a policy, a trajectory is defined by the interaction of an agent with an MDP. It is a (state,
action, reward)-sequence s0 , a0 , r1 , s1 , ..., sk , ak , rk+1 , sk+1 where s0 = sI . The sequence s0 , s1 , ..., sk , sk+1
is the state-sequence of the trajectory, and the sequence r1 , r2 , ..., rk+1 is the reward-sequence of the
trajectory.


3     Symbolic Reward Machines
In this section, we propose our Symbolic Reward Machines (SRMs) as a novel representation of non-Markovian
reward functions. SRMs integrate aspects of a Reward Machine and a symbolic automaton [4,17]. The major
difference between RMs and SRMs is the input. RMs get propositional symbols (labels) from a specified
alphabet as the input. In contrast, SRMs receive the environment state directly and handle it through guards.
These guards can be defined by the specified logic.

Definition 2 (SRM). A Symbolic Reward Machine is a 5-tuple C = (L, Q, q0 , δ, σ) and consists of a logic L
with formulas Ψ and an input space S, a finite set of states Q, an initial state q0 ∈ Q, a transition relation
                                                                            φ
δ ⊆ Q × Ψ × Q, and a partial output function σ : Q × Ψ → R. We write p −    → q for a transition (p, φ, q) ∈ δ.

The input space S is always given by the underlying MDP. The state space of the environment can be also
defined by a function S : Var → U . Each component of the state is represented by a variable x ∈ Var that is
mapped to a concrete value in a universe U . Furthermore, we call φ the guard of a transition. The SRM
takes the transition if the current environment state s fulfills the guard. This means that s is a model of
3
    Icarte et al. [5,14] introduce Reward Machines more generally. The Reward Machines, that are considered in this
    paper, are defined by Icarte et al. [5,14] as Simple Reward Machines.


                                                             4
φ, which is expressed by s |= φ. Additionally, the SRM returns the reward from the output function σ. We
focus solely on SRMs with LRA (Linear Real Arithmetic) [8] as the logic component in this paper. This is
done for simplicity. However, the concepts should be easily extendable to other logics with the following two
properties. The restriction for the logic is that the validity and satisfiability problem has to be decidable.
   In addition, we require the following two properties for an SRM:
 1. An SRM is deterministic. The transition function δ has to be deterministic. Intuitively speaking, there
    are no two outgoing transitions of an SRM state that can be taken at the same time. This means that
    the guards of any two transitions of an SRM state cannot be fulfilled at the same time. In formula terms,
                                                                                            φ         φ′
    it is required that for all p, q, q ′ ∈ Q and formulas φ, φ′ ∈ Ψ it is true that, if p −
                                                                                           → q, and p −→ q ′ , and q
                      ′              ′
    is not equal to q , then φ ∧ φ has to be unsatisfiable.
 2. An SRM is complete. Intuitively speaking, an SRM has to handle any possible input. This means that for
                                                                                   φ
    all SRM states p ∈ Q and every input x, there has to exist a transition p −    → q with q ∈ Q and φ ∈ Ψ and
    x fulfills the guard φ.
   We also define an SRM run of an SRM C = (L, Q, q0 , δ, σ) that can process a complete state-sequence and
outputs a reward-sequence. For that, first, we define the sequence of the states of the SRM while it processes
the state-sequence s0 , ..., sn of an trajectory τ . The sequence of SRM states q0 , ..., qn is defined by
                            
                              q0 , if i = 0,
                    qi =
                              q , with q ∈ Q. ∃φ ∈ Ψ. (qi−1 , φ, q) ∈ δ ∧ si |= φ , otherwise.

On this basis, the output sequence r1 , ..., rn of the SRM C is defined by

                             ri = σ(qi−1 , φ) with φ ∈ Ψ ∧ si |= φ ∧ (qi−1 , φ, qi ) ∈ δ.

On the basis of these two definitions, we define an SRM run of the SRM C on the state-sequence s0 , ..., sn of
a trajectory τ by C(τ ) = r1 , ..., rn .

3.1   Learning effective policies with given SRMs
We can represent non-Markovian reward functions with our proposed notion of SRMs. However, they are not
supported by the existing learning algorithms QRM [5] and JIRP [19]. Consequently, we must introduce new
learning algorithms that use SRMs to learn effective policies. We propose QSRM as a learning algorithm that
supports SRMs. QSRM is similar to QRM in that it also assumes that the user provides the required SRM.
However, in contrast to QRM, which requires access to an explicit labeling function, QSRM only requires the
current state and the reward of the environment. Thus, QSRM respects the standard environment interaction
interface in RL. The procedure of QSRM is given as pseudocode in Algorithm 1. It can be seen that the
procedure uses the identical environment interaction as in Q-Learning [18]; the environment receives an action
and emits the current state and a reward. In addition, QSRM uses the same multi-update scheme as QRM to
accelerate the learning process.
    The natural question is whether our new QSRM algorithm preserves the convergence property of Q-
Learning, and thus, is also guaranteed to converge to an optimal policy.

Theorem 1 (QSRM Convergence). QSRM always converges to an optimal policy in the limit with the
same conditions as Q-Learning [18,13]. So, if
 1. all rewards are bounded;
 2. all (state, action)-pairs are visited infinity often;
 3. learning rates 0 ≤ αt < 1; and
 4. learning rates αt are decreasing at the right rate:
                                            ∞
                                            X                   ∞
                                                                X
                                                  αt = ∞ and         αt2 < ∞.
                                              t                  t


                                                            5
Algorithm 1 Q-Learning for SRMs (QSRM)
Initialize an ϵ-greedy policy µ, and initialize Q-tables qu for all u ∈ QSRM for all (state, action)-pairs with 1.
Then iterate:
 1: for t in {0,..., number_of_episodes - 1} do
 2:      Start new trajectory with s = sI and u = q0
 3:      while s is not terminal state do
 4:         Sample action a from µ given s and u
 5:         Execute action a in environment and receive next state s′
 6:         for u′ ∈ QSRM do
 7:             Get r, u′′ by SRM (u′ , s′ )
 8:             Update qu′ by qu′ (s, a) = qu′ (s, a) + αt (r + γ · max
                                                                     ′
                                                                        qu′′ (s′ , a′ ) − qu′ (s, a))
                                                                       a
 9:       end for
10:       Step in SRM with input s′
11:       s = s′ and u = current SRM state
12:    end while
13: end for
14: return policy π(s, u) = argmaxa qu (s, a) for all s ∈ S and u ∈ QSRM



Proof. We show the convergence property by building a cross product MDP M2 = (S2 , sI2 , A2 , p2 , R2 ) with a
Markovian reward function of an MDP M = (S, sI , A, p, R) where R is defined by an SRM C = (L, Q, q0 , δ, σ).
The following scheme is used to build M2 . The state space S2 is the cross product S × Q. The initial state
sI2 is defined by the tuple (sI , q0 ). The action set A2 is taken from the action set A from MDP M . The
probabilistic transition function is defined by
                                           (
                                 ′ ′        p(s, a, s′ ) , if ∃φ ∈ Ψ such that (q, φ, q ′ ) ∈ δ ∧ s′ |= φ,
                p2 ((s, q), a, (s , q )) =
                                            0            , otherwise.

The reward function R2 is defined by
                                                                 X
                                    R2 ((s, p), a, (s′ , q)) =         Js′ |= φK · σ(p, φ),
                                                                 φ∈Ψ

whereby JxK is the Iverson bracket, which evaluates to 1 if x is true, and to 0 otherwise. Q-Learning by
Watkins et al. [18] converges for the MDP M2 to the optimal policy. With the transformation procedure as
defined above, QSRM does exactly the same as Q-Learning except that QSRM updates multiple states of the
cross product MDP in parallel. This multi-update is applied by using the correct data of the reward function.
Hence, QSRM also converges to the optimal policy with the same conditions as standard Q-Learning.          ⊔
                                                                                                           ⊓

    We also develop QSRM with function approximation methods and name it DQSRM. The core idea remains
unchanged. Instead of Q-tables, neural networks are utilized to approximate the Q-function for each SRM
state.


4    Learning Symbolic Reward Machines

QSRM provides the ability to use all existing environments out of the box, e.g., the environments of the
popular Gymnasium library [15], as it respects the standard interaction scheme. However, QSRM is also not
fully compatible with the standard RL definition because it assumes that the agent has access to the SRM
and thus to the reward function. To overcome this limitation, we propose the LSRM algorithm that can
automatically infer the SRM. LSRM can work in two settings. First, we assume that the possible guards are
given by the user. We name this setting ‘LSRM with given formulas’ (LSRM-GF). In the second setting of
LSRM, we lift this assumption. We name the second setting ‘LSRM with formula templates’ (LSRM-FT).


                                                             6
    The basic procedure is the same for both settings. It is given as pseudocode in Algorithm 2. Like JIRP
[19], LSRM starts with a basic hypothesis SRM and updates it if counterexamples are found. The basic
SRM consists only of one state and one self-loop. LSRM tries to learn a policy with (D)QSRM based on
the current hypothesis SRM. The agent receives a reward from the environment and a reward from the
current hypothesis SRM. These rewards are consistent if they are equal. If the rewards are not consistent,
LSRM stops the (D)QSRM algorithm and adds the current trajectory to a set of counterexamples E. We
refer to the reward at timestep t of a counterexample e ∈ E as re,t , and to the observed state as se,t . Note
that re,t is only defined for t > 0. Furthermore, we define a function T that maps a counterexample e to the
set of all timesteps contained in that counterexample. We also need the set of timesteps excluding the last
one. Therefore, we define a function T ∗ with T ∗ (e) = T (e) \ {|T (e)| − 1}. After adding the trajectory to the
counterexamples, LSRM uses an SRM-inferring process to generate a new hypothesis SRM that is consistent
with all counterexamples. Next, LSRM restarts the (D)QSRM algorithm with the new hypothesis SRM.


Algorithm 2 LSRM (Learning Symbolic Reward Machines)
 1: obs = {}
 2: r = {}
 3: hypothesis_srm = init_basic_srm()
 4: q_tables = init_q_tables_for_srm(hypothesis_srm)
 5: for number_of_episodes times do
 6:    observations, rewards, rewards_hypothesis_srm = QSRM_episode( hypothesis_srm, q_tables)
 7:    if rewards ̸= rewards_hypothesis_srm then
 8:        obs.append(observations)
 9:        r.append(rewards)
10:        hypothesis_srm = generate_consistent_srm(obs, r)
11:        q_tables = init_q_tables_for_srm(hypothesis_srm)
12:     end if
13: end for


    The SRM-inferring process is the core component of LSRM. It generates a consistent SRM from the set of
counterexamples E. The LSRM algorithm infers a consistent SRM by encoding the collected counterexamples
into a constraint satisfaction problem. The encoding produces a logical formula φSRM with two key properties:
(1) the formula is satisfiable if, and only if, a consistent SRM exists, and (2) we can build a consistent
SRM from a model of the formula. The required number of SRM states in the state set Q is not known a
priori. Therefore, the inferring process generates constraints for an increasing number of SRM states. At
the beginning, it encodes an SRM with only one SRM state. So, it applies Q = {q0 } where q0 is w.l.o.g. the
initial state. If no consistent SRM with n SRM states can be found, the SRM-inferring process increases the
number of SRM states to n + 1, which results to the state set Q = {q0 , ..., qn }, and tries it again. As a result,
it generates a consistent SRM with the fewest number of SRM states.

4.1   LSRM with Given Formulas
In LSRM with given formulas (LSRM-GF), we assume that the user provides a set of formulas Ψ =
{φ0 , . . . , φf −1 } for the guards of the SRM. LSRM-GF uses four constraint types to encode the following
properties of the SRM. First, the SRM has to be deterministic. To ensure this, LSRM-GF adds Constraint
φdet . Furthermore, the SRM is always in exactly one SRM state, and the first SRM state is always the initial
state. This is modeled by Constraint φstate . Moreover, the SRM has to be consistent with all counterexamples.
LSRM-GF uses the constraints φtrans and φused to model this property. The global formula φSRM is the
conjunction
                                         φSRM = φdet ∧ φstate ∧ φtrans ∧ φused
of all these constraints. We will define all the components in detail in the following. First, we have to define
the variables that are used to build the constraints.


                                                        7
Variables LSRM with given formulas uses:
 – Boolean variables dp,φ,q that encode whether a transition from state p to state q exists with the formula
   φ as the guard;
 – Boolean variables xe,t,p that encode whether the SRM is in state p after processing counterexample e
   through the t-th observation; and
 – Real variables op,φ that encode the SRM output in state p and the guard φ is fulfilled.

Constraints On the basis of the variables described above, we define the constraints used in detail in the
following. The constraints are defined by:
                  ^ ^ ^ ^               ^
           φdet =                          dp,φ1 ,q1 ∧ dp,φ2 ,q2 ⇒ Unsat(φ1 ∧ φ2 )                      (1)
                   p∈Q q1 ∈Q q2 ∈Q φ1 ∈Ψ         φ2 ∈Ψ,
                                                (p,φ1 ,q1 )
                                                    ̸=
                                                (p,φ2 ,q2 )

                      ^                ^        _                   ^ ^
           φstate =         xe,0,q0         (        xe,t,p ) ∧ (              ¬(xe,t,p ∧ xe,t,q ))                   (2)
                      e∈E             t∈T (e) p∈Q                   p∈Q q∈Q
                                                                        p̸=q

                       ^      ^        ^ ^ ^
           φtrans =                                      xe,t,p ∧ dp,φ,q ∧ (se,t+1 |= φ) ⇒ xe,t+1,q ∧ op,φ = re,t+1   (3)
                      e∈E t∈T ∗ (e) p∈Q φ∈Ψ q∈Q

                      ^      ^        _ _ _
           φused =                                      xe,t,p ∧ dp,φ,q ∧ (se,t+1 |= φ).                              (4)
                      e∈E t∈T ∗ (e) p∈Q φ∈Ψ q∈Q

    The four constraints are used to encode in general two properties. Constraint 1 guarantees that the SRM
is deterministic and the constraints 2, 3 and 4 encode the runs over all counterexamples, which leads to the
property that the SRM is consistent with all these counterexamples.
    The basic idea of Constraint 1 to encode the determinism property is the following. If there are any two
different outgoing transitions in one SRM state that should be used, then the conjunction of both transition
guards must be unsatisfiable. The usage of two outgoing transitions would be indicated by setting variables
dp,φ1 ,q1 and dp,φ2 ,q2 to true. Note that the Unsat term can be precalculated as the formulas are given a priori.
This precalculation is essential as the use of a universal quantifier would be required otherwise. This universal
quantifier would lead to a significant decrease of the SMT solver performance.
    Constraint 2 encodes that the SRM is always in exactly one SRM state. In addition, naturally, the SRM
must always start in the initial SRM state q0 . The variables xe,0,q0 ensure that the SRM starts in the initial
state for all counterexamples. The remaining part of the constraint models the following two properties. First,
the SRM is always in at least one state. That is modeled by the discjunction over all variables xe,t,p for that
counterexample. Second, the SRM cannot be in two states at the same time. That is modeled by the negation
¬(xe,t,p ∧ xe,t,q ).
    Constraint 3 encodes consistency across all counterexamples. For each state in the state-sequence of a
counterexample, the SRM has to output the observed reward of the reward-sequence. The SRM is in one
specific state p at timestep t during the processing of counterexample e. If there is an outgoing transition
with the guard φ to state q and the observed environment state of the counterexample is a model of this
guard, the SRM takes this transition. This means that the SRM is in state q in the next timestep. In addition,
the generated reward of the SRM, which is encoded by op,φ , has to be equal to the observed reward in the
counterexample e.
    Constraint 4 guarantees that for each step in the counterexample, the SRM has to be in one state p,
there is a transition from a state p to a state q with the guard φ, and the observation of the step in the
counterexample is a model of the guard φ. In other words, we need a step that the SRM takes. So, it
guarantees that one premise of the implications in Constraint 3 is valid.


                                                                       8
   All these constraints guarantee that a consistent SRM can be generated by finding a model for the global
formula φSRM . Next, we describe how LSRM-GF generates a consistent SRM given a model of φSRM .


Generate SRM from Model The SMT solver returns a model of φSRM , if and only if, φSRM is satisfiable.
We assume w.l.o.g. that the SRM states form the set Q = {q0 , q1 , ..., qn } where q0 denotes the initial state.
LSRM-GF can derive a consistent SRM C = (L, Q, q0 , δ, σ) from the model. The logic L is set to LRA (see
Section 3). The output function σ is defined by σ(p, φ) = op,φ for all p ∈ Q and φ ∈ Ψ . To generate the
transition relation δ, LSRM-GF adds (p, φ, q) to δ for all p, q ∈ Q and φ ∈ Ψ if dp,φ,q is set to true in the
model.
    With this procedure, LSRM-GF constructs a consistent SRM based on a model for φSRM . However, the
resulting SRM is not guaranteed to be complete. It is possible that for some inputs, the learned SRM does
not have a transition with a fulfilled guard. Thus, it is not a valid SRM for our definition in Section 3. To
achieve this property while preserving quantifier freedom in the constraints, we first invoke the SMT solver
without further constraints and then add a post-processing step afterwards. We process each SRM state
p ∈ Q with the following procedure. We define a formula φp,out that is the negated disjunction of all outgoing
guards. Therefore, first, we define the set of formulas X p = {φ|φ ∈ Ψ ∧ ∃q ∈ Q. dp,φ,q = T rue}. The set X p
includes all formulas that are used as a guard for the SRM state p, which is indicated by a variable dp,φ,q is
set to true. Based on the formula set X p , the formula φp,out is defined by
                                                              _
                                                φp,out = ¬           φ.
                                                             φ∈X p

If φp,out is satisfiable, we add a self-loop transition with φp,out as the guard and an output of zero. This is done
by extending the set Ψ of the generated SRM with φp,out , adding (p, φp,out , p) to δ and letting σ(p, φp,out )
maps to 0. This procedure works because we only want to generate a consistent SRM. No counterexample
uses the transition that we add because constraints 3 and 4 would force a transition that covers the example,
otherwise. As a result of this post-processing step, LSRM-GF generates a fully working SRM that is consistent
with all counterexamples.


4.2   LSRM with Formula Templates

LSRM-GF still has the limitation that the user must provide the concrete formula set Ψ . This assumption
is not feasible for many practical tasks because the user must have an extensive domain expertise about
the environment and the task. To address this limitation, we lift this assumption in the second setting that
we name LSRM with formula templates (LSRM-FT). LSRM-FT can learn an SRM without any further
information except the standard RL environment output, which consists of an environment state and a reward.
This makes LSRM-FT compatible with all existing environments and the standard RL definitions. LSRM-FT
automatically infers for each SRM state the required formulas for the guards. This means that LSRM-FT
maintains a formula set Ψ p for each SRM state p ∈ Q. Let f ∈ N denote the number of formulas that can be
used as guards for an SRM state. There are two options to handle the number of formulas f . The first one
is to increase the number of states and the number of formulas in parallel in order to search for a model.
The second option is that LSRM-FT handles the number of formulas per state as a hyperparameter. This
option is computationally faster and is guaranteed to find the SRM with the fewest number of SRM states for
the specified number of formulas. In the evaluation, we will use the second option. By using f formulas per
SRM state, Ψ p is defined by Ψ p = {φp0 , ..., φpf −1 }. As the algorithm’s name suggests, LSRM-FT uses formula
templates as fixed building blocks for the formulas in Ψ p . Formula templates are formulas that contain free
variables besides those representing the inputs of the SRM. As an example, one formula template could be
φ = x ≥ b1 ∧ x < b2 . This formula template could be used to find an interval for a component x. LSRM-FT
infers suitable values for the additional free variables; in the given example, for b1 and b2 . This means that
LSRM-FT concretizes a formula template. A concretized version of the example formula template could be
φ = x ≥ 2 ∧ x < 3. Inferring formulas from templates is a significant improvement to overcome the limitation


                                                         9
that the user has to provide the concrete formulas, and thus, information about the reward structure. In
principal, every formula can be used as a formula template.
   The basic idea of LSRM-FT is the same as for LSRM-GF. LSRM-FT uses constraints to guarantee the
same properties as LSRM-GF. The SRM is deterministic, the SRM is always in exactly one SRM state, and
the SRM is consistent with all counterexamples. Therefore, the constraints φdet , φstate , φtrans , and φused are
adapted from LSRM-GF to LSRM-FT.
   In the following, first, we define the needed variables again. Afterwards, we define and describe the required
adjustments of the constraints.


Variables The general idea of encoding a consistent SRM is the same as in LSRM with given formulas.
Hence, LSRM with formula templates requires similar variables for the structure and the runs over the
counterexamples. We adapt the variables dp,φ,q , xe,t,p , and op,φ as defined for LSRM-GF in Section 4.1. So,
LSRM-FT uses:

 – Boolean variables dp,φp ,q that encode whether a transition from state p to state q exists with the formula
   φp as the guard;
 – Boolean variables xe,t,p that encode whether the SRM is in state p after processing counterexample e
   through the t-th observation; and
 – Real variables op,φp that encode the SRM output in state p and the guard φp is fulfilled.

   In addition to these variables, LSRM-FT uses further variables for the formula templates that are used to
build the guards. The required variables depend on the specific formula template that is used. We will use a
box formula template in the evaluation of our methods. A box formula template can describe an interval for
each component of the environment state. We described in Section 3 that the state space can also be defined
by a function S : Var → U . On the basis of this definition, the box formula template specifies an interval for
each x ∈ Var. We also allow a negated box formula template, whereby the complete specified box is negated.
Consequently, the box formula template is defined by
                                                      ^
                                  φbox = posbox ⇔             x ≥ bx≥ ∧ x < bx< ,
                                                     x∈Var


where posbox indicates whether it is a box formula template or a negated box formula template. This formula
template is used in all SRM states and guards. The following variables are required to define the formula
templates for the guards:

 – Boolean variables pospi that encode whether the formula template of formula φpi of state p appears in
   positive or negated form; and
 – Real variables bpi,xj that encode the right sides of the inequality equations of the box template for formula
   φpi and the environment state component x ∈ Var and the operator j ∈ {≥, <}.

   On the basis of these variables and our general concept of box templates, we can define the formula
templates for each SRM state p. The set of formula templates for a state p is Γ p = {ψ0p , ..., ψfp−1 }, where
each formula template is defined by
                                                     ^
                                    ψip = pospi ⇔           x ≥ bpx≥ ∧ x < bpx< .
                                                    x∈Var


The number of formula templates associated with each SRM state is given by |Γ p | and corresponds to the
number of formulas f that LSRM-FT can use in each SRM state. In the naive approach, each guard is
constructed directly from its formula template by setting φpi = ψip .


                                                         10
Constraints The constraints of LSRM-FT are adapted from the constraints of LSRM-GF in Section 4.1.
The modified constraints are:
             ^ ^ ^ ^            ^
     φdet =                         dp,φ1 ,q1 ∧ dp,φ2 ,q2 ⇒ Unsat(φ1 ∧ φ2 )                   (5)
              p∈Q q1 ∈Q q2 ∈Q φ1 ∈Ψ p φ2 ∈Ψ p ,
                                     (p,φ1 ,q1 )
                                         ̸=
                                     (p,φ2 ,q2 )

                  ^                ^        _                  ^ ^
       φstate =         xe,0,q0         (       xe,t,p ) ∧ (              ¬(xe,t,p ∧ xe,t,q ))                            (6)
                  e∈E             t∈T (e) p∈Q                  p∈Q q∈Q
                                                                   p̸=q

                   ^      ^        ^ ^ ^
       φtrans =                                     xe,t,p ∧ dp,φ,q ∧ substitute(φ, se,t+1 ) ⇒ xe,t+1,q ∧ op,φ = re,t+1   (7)
                  e∈E t∈T ∗ (e) p∈Q φ∈Ψ p q∈Q

                  ^      ^        _ _ _
       φused =                                     xe,t,p ∧ dp,φ,q ∧ substitute(φ, se,t+1 ).                              (8)
                  e∈E t∈T ∗ (e) p∈Q φ∈Ψ p q∈Q

    There are two differences in the constraints. First, we replace each Ψ with Ψ p because LSRM-FT uses a
separate formula set per SRM state. And second, we cannot precalculate se,t+1 |= φ. Instead, we use the
function substitute that performs substitution of the variables x ∈ Var through the observed environment state
se,t+1 . However, one challenge remains. In Section 4.1, we described that we can precalculate Unsat(φ1 ∧ φ2 ),
and thus, eliminate a large part of the work for the SMT solver. However, this approach will not work for
LSRM-FT. The formulas φ1 and φ2 are now formula templates and LSRM-FT should infer values for these
templates. So, we cannot precalculate the unsatisfiability anymore. The naive approach would be to add a
universal quantifier. Instead of Unsat(φ1 ∧ φ2 ), it would use ∀s ∈ S. ¬(substitute(φ1 , s) ∧ substitute(φ2 , s)).
However, this would lead to a major degeneration in the performance of the SMT solver.
    To overcome this performance issue, we propose another approach to guarantee determinism without
introducing quantifiers. As a result, our version retains the quantifier freedom. Currently, each guard formula
φpi ∈ Ψ p of an SRM state p is defined by its formula template ψip ∈ Γ p . So, φpi = ψip applies. However, as we
mentioned, it is possible that two guard formulas φp1 , φp2 ∈ Ψ p are satisfiable at the same time (φp1 ∧ φp2 is
satisfiable). Hence, we have to adjust the guard formulas that we can guarantee that two of them are not
satisfiable at the same time. We reach this property by using the following mechanism. Instead of the guard
φpi only consists of the formula template ψip , it consists of all formula templates in Γ p . The idea is that the
related formula template ψip should be fulfilled and all other formula templates ψjp with i ̸= j are not fulfilled.
Consequently, the guard formula φpi ∈ Ψ p is defined by
                                                          ^
                                               φpi = ψip       ¬ψjp .
                                                                      ψjp ∈Ψ p
                                                                        i̸=j

This definition always guarantees determinism. Let us take any two guard formulas φp1 , φp2 ∈ Ψ p with φp1 ̸= φp2 .
To fulfill φp1 , ψ1p has to be fulfilled. However, ψ1p appears in negated form in φp2 . As a result, φp2 cannot be
fulfilled. This also applies vice versa and for each guard formula pair and for each SRM state. The remaining
part is to force that there are no two outgoing transitions that uses the same guard because it would be non
deterministic otherwise. Therefore, we rewrite the determinism constraint φdet to
                                            ^ ^ ^ ^
                                    φdet =                    ¬(dp,φ,q1 ∧ dp,φ,q2 ).
                                                  p∈Q q1 ∈Q q2 ∈Q φ∈Ψ p
                                                            q1 ̸=q2

Consequently, the determinism property of the SRM is always guaranteed. The global formula φSRM remains
as before:
                                 φSRM = φdet ∧ φstate ∧ φtrans ∧ φused .


                                                                      11
Generate SRM from Model LSRM-FT can generate a consistent SRM from a given model for the global
formula φSRM . First, it sets the inferred variables for the formula templates Γ p for each SRM state p. The
remaining procedure is similar as the procedure described in Section 4.1 for LSRM-GF. The only difference is
that we replace every Ψ with a Ψ p because LSRM-FT relies on a formula set per SRM state.

4.3    LSRM Convergence
In this section, we analyze the convergence properties of our two LSRM methods. Therefore, we analyse
two convergence properties for each method in the following. First, whether LSRM almost surely learns an
equivalent SRM, and second, whether LSRM learns an optimal policy. We say that two SRMs C1 and C2 are
almost surely equivalent for an MDP M , noted with C1 ≃ C2 , if for all trajectories τ with a non negative
probability to occur, the generated reward-sequences C1 (τ ) and C2 (τ ) are equal. In particular, the probability
of the set of all trajectories with C1 (τ ) ̸= C2 (τ ) is zero.
    The first result is that all our methods which rely on DQSRM do not converge to an optimal policy. The
underlying method is based on all three elements (function approximation, bootstrapping, and off-policy
training) of the deadly triad [13].

Convergence of LSRM with Given Formulas In the following, we describe the convergence properties
of LSRM-GF. Therefore, first, we show that the learned SRM is almost surely equivalent to the one used in
the environment. Afterwards, we argue that LSRM converges to an optimal policy.

Theorem 2 (LSRM-GF convergence to equivalent SRM). LSRM with given formulas converges to an
almost surely equivalent SRM in the limit if all state-sequences are observed infinitely often and the given
formulas are sufficient to build an equivalent SRM.

Proof. We prove the theorem by contradiction. Assume that the SRM C1 used by LSRM and the SRM C2
used in the environment are not almost surely equivalent, and let trajectory τ be the evidence for that. This
means that C1 (τ ) ̸= C2 (τ ), and the probability of observing τ is greater than zero. The RL setup guarantees
that such a trajectory τ will be observed in the limit. Furthermore, let w.l.o.g. epoch m be the first epoch in
which τ occurs. At this point, LSRM stops the learning process and adds τ to the set of counterexamples
E. Subsequently, LSRM infers a new SRM that is consistent with all counterexamples and therefore is also
consistent with τ . Hence, from episode m + 1 onward, the SRM is consistent for τ with the SRM used in the
environment. As a result, the SRM inferred by LSRM is almost surely equivalent to the SRM used in the
environment in the limit.
    The remaining part to show is that LSRM-GF guarantees to generate a consistent SRM from the
counterexamples E. Therefore, we must show that if a consistent SRM exists, then there also exists a model
for the formula φSRM and vice versa. We start by proving the forward implication. This means that a
consistent SRM C = (L, Q, q0 , δ, σ) is given and we have to show that φSRM = φdet ∧ φstate ∧ φtrans ∧ φused
is satisfiable by constructing a model for it. Since the formula is a conjunction of multiple subformulas, it is
sufficient to show that all subformulas are fulfilled by a model.
    First, we consider subformula φdet and show its satisfiability. We set all variables dp,φ,q to true if
(p, φ, q) ∈ δ and to false otherwise. These assignments also guarantee that all dp,φ,q are set. Since the SRM is
deterministic, it holds that if there exist two distinct transitions (p, φ1 , q1 ), (p, φ2 , q2 ) ∈ δ, then φ1 and φ2 are
not satisfiable at the same time. This also means that if any two different dp,φ1 ,q1 , dp,φ2 ,q2 variables are set to
true, then the conjunction of φ1 and φ2 is unsatisfiable. This results in the formula φdet evaluating to true in
the case that two dp,φ,q variables are true. Furthermore, if at least one of any two variables dp,φ1 ,q1 , dp,φ2 ,q2
is false, then the premise is false and thus the implication is true. This results in the property that φdet
evaluates to true in all cases.
    The second subformula is φstate . To show that φstate is satisfiable, let us pick an arbitrary counterexample
e ∈ E. In addition, let n denote the length of the state-sequence of the counterexample. As we described in
Section 3, the run of the SRM C induces a sequence of SRM states q0 , ..., qn . We set xe,t,p to true if p = qt
and to false otherwise. Since q0 is always the first SRM state, as it is the initial state of the SRM, the first


                                                           12
part of the formula φstate is true. Furthermore, the SRM is in every timestep exactly in one SRM state.
At timestep t, the SRM is in state qt . This also means that for each t, we set only one variable xe,t,p for
counterexample e to true and for all other SRM states to false. Consequently, the second part of the formula,
which describes that only one xe,t,p can be true at each timestep for a counterexample, evaluates to true
under the assignments we made. We make these assignments for each counterexample and thus the complete
formula φstate evaluates to true.
     The remaining subformulas are φtrans and φused . We already set all variables dp,φ,q and xe,t,p . They are
fixed and cannot be changed in our proof anymore. We consider any counterexample e ∈ E again. This
counterexample consists of a state-sequence s0 , ..., sn and a reward sequence r1 , ..., rn . The run of the SRM C
induces a sequence of SRM states q0 , ..., qn again. First, we show that for each timestep t, φused is true. The
SRM is in state qt in timestep t. In φstate , we set the variable xe,t,qt to true. Furthermore, the SRM transitions
to state qt+1 by using a transition with a guard φt and the observed state se,t+1 , which is the input of the
SRM, fulfills this guard. We set in φdet all dp,φ,q to true if and only if the SRM has a transition from state p
to state q with guard φ. This means that for the current timestep t, we set the variable dqt ,φt ,qt+1 to true in
φdet . In addition, the observed state se,t+1 fulfills the guard. Hence, se,t+1 |= φt also holds. Consequently,
φused entirely evaluates to true.
     To prove that φtrans evaluates to true, the remaining part to show is that only one premise is true and for
the true premise, the conclusion is correct. We already argued that for each counterexample e and timestep t,
the SRM is in exactly one SRM state qt . This means that for all other states the premise is wrong because
for all other states, we set the variable xe,t,p to false. In addition, the SRM is deterministic. This means that
there is only one outgoing transition that is fulfilled by the observed state. So, either we set the variable dp,φ,q
to false in φdet or the observed state se,t+1 is not a model of φ and thus se,t+1 |= φ evaluates to false. As a
result, there is exactly one premise in φtrans that is true for each counterexample e and timestep t. For this
valid premise, we have to prove that the conclusion is correct. The SRM is for counterexample e and timestep
t in state qt . In addition, the SRM used the transition (qt , φt , qt+1 ) and thus the observed state se,t+1 fulfills
φt . Moreover, the SRM outputs the reward re,t . Consequently, the SRM is in state qt+1 in timestep t + 1. We
set the variable xe,t+1,qt+1 to true in φstate . The remaining part to show is that oqt ,φt = re,t+1 evaluates to
true. We know that the SRM always outputs for the transition it took the same reward that is the observed
reward re,t+1 . Thus, we can set variable oqt ,φt to the reward re,t+1 and thus the complete conclusion evaluates
to true. We never try to set oqt ,φt to two different values because then the SRM has to output two different
values for the same SRM state and guard. This is not possible because one formula can only be used one time
in an SRM state as a guard. Otherwise, the SRM is not deterministic anymore. As a result, the complete
formula φtrans evaluates to true for our assignments.
     The remaining variables, which are only variables op,φ , can be set to zero in order to obtain a complete
model where every variable has an assigned value. Since all subformulas are fulfilled by our constructed model,
the global formula φSRM evaluates to true. This shows that whenever a consistent SRM exists, there also
exists a model satisfying φSRM .
     Next, we show that if there exists a model m of the formula φSRM , then there exists a consistent SRM.
We have to show the following four properties:

 1. SRM is deterministic;
 2. SRM always starts in q0 ;
 3. SRM is consistent with all e ∈ E; and
 4. SRM is complete: This is directly given by the argumentation of the post-processing step in Section 4.1.

The SRM is constructed as described in Section 4.1.
    First, we start to show that the constructed SRM is deterministic. We only add transitions (p, φ, q) to
δ if dp,φ,q is set to true. Since φdet evaluates to true, the conjunction of the guards of any two outgoing
transitions in an SRM state is unsatisfiable. Thus, the generated SRM is always deterministic.
    The second property that we have to prove is that the SRM always starts in the initial state q0 . In the
model m, every variable xe,0,q0 is set to true. According our construction of an SRM, we set this state to the
initial state of the SRM, and thus, the SRM always starts in the initial state.


                                                         13
    The most important property to prove is the third one, which claims that the SRM is consistent with all
counterexamples. Let us pick any counterexample e ∈ E that consists of the state-sequence s0 , ..., sn and the
reward-sequence r1 , ..., rn . Next, we have to show that the SRM is consistent with this counterexample. The
formula φstate guarantees that the SRM is always in exactly one SRM state at every timestep t and that the
first SRM state is the initial state. It is important that the generated SRM always transitions to the next
correct state that is specified with the variable xe,t,p and that the SRM outputs the observed return. Let us
assume that the SRM is in state p after processing the counterexamples e trough the t-th observation. We
have to show that the SRM transitions to the next state that is indicated as the variable xe,t+1,q is set to
true in the model. The formula φused guarantees that there is a variable dp,φ,q set to true and the observed
state fulfills the guard φ. As our construction, we add a transition (p, φ, q) to δ. Since we already showed that
the SRM is deterministic, the SRM has exactly one transition that it can take. Furthermore, the next SRM
state is q, which corresponds to the variable xe,t+1,q is set to true in the model. The last thing to check is
whether the SRM outputs the correct reward re,t+1 . The formula φtrans guarantees that the model variable
op,φ is set to re,t+1 . In the construction of the SRM, the output function σ is defined by σ(p, φ) = op,φ for all
p ∈ Q and φ ∈ Ψ . Consequently, the SRM outputs the correct reward re,t+1 . As a result, if there exists a
model m of the formula φSRM , then there exists a consistent SRM.
    We showed that whenever a consistent SRM exists, there also exists a model satisfying φSRM , and
whenever a model m of the formula φSRM exists, then there exists a consistent SRM. Consequently, LSRM-
GF guarantees to generate a consistent SRM from the counterexamples E.                                          ⊔
                                                                                                                ⊓
Corollary 1 (LSRM-GF convergence to optimal policy). LSRM with given formulas converges to an
optimal policy in the limit for finite state spaces with the same conditions as QSRM (see Theorem 1) and
LSRM-GF converges to an equivalent SRM.
Proof. We prove above that LSRM with given formulas converges to an almost surely equivalent SRM. The
convergence of QSRM then guarantees that LSRM-GF also converges to an optimal policy in the limit.

Convergence of LSRM with Formula Templates The natural question is whether LSRM-FT has the
same convergence properties as LSRM-GF. In the following, we argue that this is the case.
Theorem 3 (LSRM-FT convergence to equivalent SRM). LSRM with formula templates converges
to an almost surely equivalent SRM in the limit if all state-sequences are observed infinitely often and the
formula templates used are capable of expressing the formulas that are used as guards at the transitions of the
underlying SRM in the environment.
Proof. The proof is adapted from Theorem 2. Only the SRM-inferring process is different. However, both
SRM-inferring processes generate a new SRM that is consistent with the counterexamples. The proof that
LSRM-FT generates a consistent SRM from the counterexamples E is analogous to the proof for LSRM-GF.
The difference is that for LSRM-FT the determinism of different guards is given through the construction of
them and it is only necessary to check that a guard is not used for two outgoing transitions in one SRM state.
Furthermore, each Ψ has to be replaced by an Ψ p . As a result, LSRM with formula templates converges to an
almost surely equivalent SRM.
Corollary 2 (LSRM-FT convergence to optimal policy). LSRM with formula templates converges to
an optimal policy in the limit for finite state spaces with the same conditions as QSRM (see Theorem 1) and
LSRM-FT converges to an equivalent SRM.
Proof. We prove above that LSRM with formula templates converges to an almost surely equivalent SRM.
The convergence of QSRM then guarantees that LSRM-FT also converges to an optimal policy in the limit.


5   Experimental Results
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods, we implemented a prototype in Python using PyTorch
[11] for training the neural networks. We evaluate the methods in discrete (finite) and continuous (infinite)


                                                       14
environments. The SMT solver used is Z3 [10], and the experiments were carried out on an Intel Core
i9-13900K and an NVIDIA RTX A6000.


Environments and Tasks Here, we describe the environments and tasks that we use to evaluate the
methods. We evaluate the methods in two types of environments.
    The first environment type is the discrete and continuous Office World. We perform two tasks on both
variants of the Office World environment. The first task is the example task that we introduced in Section 2.
The RM and SRM for the task are visualized in Figure 2. We refer to the task as ‘post_inner_offices’. The
second task is named ‘diagonal_run’. The goal of the task is that the robot navigates from the initial state
to the upper right corner (label C), then to the upper left corner (label D), and finally to the bottom right
corner (label B). The RM and SRM for this task are visualized in Figure 3.




                      (a) RM                                            (b) SRM

Figure 3: RM and SRM of task diagonal_run for the Office World. Self-loops in the RM with zero rewards
are omitted.


    We also evaluate our methods that are developed for infinite MDPs in a second environment. We use a
modified version of the Mountain Car environment, which is a widely-used environment in the RL community
and implemented in the popular Gymnasium library [15]. The first version of the Mountain Car environment
was defined by Moore [9]. We take the implementation of the Mountain Car environment of the Gymnasium
library4 and modify it. Figure 4 illustrates the difference between the original variant and our variant of the
environment. We shift the x-axis to have a left and a right mountain peak, as opposed to a single incline to
the right in the original. The selected action is used for four timesteps in our version. We denote the task for
the Mountain Car environment as ‘rml’. The name ‘rml’ refers to ‘right-middle-left’. The task is defined as
follows. First, the car has to be navigated onto the right mountain. Afterwards, it has to be navigated back to
the start region between the mountains. Thereby, it is required that the velocity is back to near zero. Finally,
the car has to be navigated onto the left mountain. We use this environment exclusively to evaluate our novel
methods for infinite MDPs. Hence, we only define an SRM version of this task that is visualized in Figure 5.


Metric To evaluate the methods, we compute a metric that we call ‘mean10 performance value’. Every
5,000 steps (for Q-Learning, QRM, QSRM, LSRM methods for finite environments) or every 10,000 steps (for
DQN [7] (with a frame stack of 100 states), DQRM, DQSRM, LSRM methods for infinite environments), we
pause the learning process and execute the current policy as a greedy policy 20 times in a newly initialized
environment, where each run is limited to a maximum of 500 steps. The mean reward obtained across these
20 runs is denoted as the ‘performance value’. The ‘mean10 performance value’ is defined as the mean of the
4
    https://gymnasium.farama.org/environments/classic_control/mountain_car_continuous/


                                                      15
                  Figure 4: Original Mountain Car environment (left) and our version (right).




                        Figure 5: SRM for task ‘rml’ for our Mountain Car environment.


  last 10 performance values, normalized to the range [0, 1] with respect to the maximal achievable reward of
  the task. We use this metric for the following reasons:

   1. It provides an intuitive view of the progress during training since we compute it periodically.
   2. It directly refers to the performance and effectiveness of the returned policy because it is not affected by
      the exploration parameter ϵ.
   3. Averaging 20 runs and using a sliding window smooths the metric value and detaches the value from
      outliers or stuck runs.
   4. Scaling between 0 and 1 improves interpretability by bounding the metric and making relative performance
      comparisons more intuitive.


  Research Questions We summarize the research questions for the evaluation in the following:

RQ1: How do our methods perform in comparison to the baseline methods Q-Learning and DQN (with a frame
     stack of 100 states for DQN)?
RQ2: How does (D)QSRM perform in comparison to (D)QRM? We expect that the methods for SRMs perform
     exactly the same as the methods for RMs. The reason for that is that QSRM can be seen as a more
     intuitive QRM method in the case where the agent has access to the RM and SRM. The reason for that is
     if we substitute each formula with a label and add a labeling function into the environment that exactly
     maps the values regarding to the formulas, we get the setup of QRM. Accordingly, QRM and QSRM
     have to generate exactly the same results if we use the same random seeds.
RQ3: LSRM learns policies end-to-end. The obvious question is whether our LSRM methods learn an optimal
     policy.
RQ4: LSRM learns the SRM in the learning process, too. Here, the main question is: Does LSRM learn an
     almost surely equivalent SRM? If this is not the case, the follow up question is: Is the learned SRM close
     enough to the one used to get good performance values?


                                                        16
5.1   Results of methods with access to RM/SRM

In this section, we focus on the methods that have direct access to the RM or SRM. Thus, we look at
(D)QRM, (D)QSRM, and for comparison at the baseline methods Q-Learning and DQN (with a frame stack
of 100 states for DQN). These methods relate to RQ1 and RQ2. Figure 6 shows the results for the different
methods. The figure provides the required information and results to evaluate and compare our methods with
the baseline and existing ones.
    The baseline methods, Q-Learning and DQN (with a frame stack of 100 states), perform worse. Q-Learning
has no information about the state history. Thus, it cannot learn non-Markovian reward functions, which
results in low mean10 performance values. Interestingly, DQN with a frame stack also performs worse in the
example tasks, even though it has access to the last 100 states, which should be sufficient to cover all required
steps for the tasks in the frame stack. If we increase the frame stack further, it becomes increasingly challenging
to train the network. In addition, we never know how large the frame stack needs to be. As a result, both
baseline methods perform worse on the example tasks. The methods based on RMs and SRMs train effective
policies and obtain good mean10 performance values. As a result of this comparison, we can say that our new
methods (D)QSRM and the existing methods (D)QRM outperform the baseline methods. Furthermore, QRM
and QSRM converge to the optimal mean10 performance value 1. This observation also matches with the
convergence properties of QRM [5] and QSRM (Theorem 1). The second observation for QRM and QSRM is
that they perform exactly the same. This is a result that we expected in RQ2. Furthermore, it demonstrates
that our new QSRM method can also train effective policies in the non-Markovian setting.
    The result regarding performance also applies to the DQRM and DQSRM methods for infinite state
spaces. As expected, both methods yield identical mean10 performance values when initialized with the same
random seed. We note that neither DQRM nor DQSRM reach optimal mean10 performance values. Thus,
their policies are not optimal. However, we expected this behaviour because both methods rely on DQN.
Nevertheless, they still achieve good performance values.
    Overall, it can be seen that our new methods (D)QSRM provide the ability to train effective policies
and obtain good performance values and at the same time have fewer restrictions than (D)QRM as they
respect the standard MDP definition and do not need a labeling function. In addition, like (D)QRM, they
outperform the baseline methods.


5.2   Results of LSRM

In this section, we evaluate our novel LSRM methods that can infer the SRM during the learning process,
and thus, provide the ability to learn policies for MDPs with non-Markovian reward functions end-to-end. In
particular, we consider RQ3 and RQ4: whether the LSRM methods learn an optimal policy, and whether the
inferred SRM is almost surely equivalent to the one used in the environment. If they are not almost surely
equivalent, we check whether the learned SRM is close enough to the one used to obtain good performance
values.
    Figure 7 shows the mean10 performance values for all of our LSRM methods. The result plots demonstrate
the performance and effectiveness of them. We can observe similar results as for the methods with access to
the SRM. LSRM converges in both variants, LSRM-GF and LSRM-FT, for the tasks in the finite environment
to the optimal mean10 performance values. Furthermore, LSRM reaches good but not optimal performance
values in the infinite environments. Regarding RQ3, we can claim that LSRM learns an optimal policy in the
finite setting but not in the infinite setting. Nevertheless, LSRM learns a very good policy in the infinite
setting. These results also match the convergence properties of LSRM from Section 4.3.
    RQ4, which addresses whether LSRM learns an almost surely equivalent SRM, is still not answered. So
far, we observe that the agent trained by LSRM reaches optimal performance values in the finite setting and
good performance values in the infinite setting. LSRM must have learned an SRM that is close enough to the
one used because it would not reach these performance values if it had learned an SRM that was far from the
true one. However, the natural question is how do the inferred SRMs look in comparison to the SRMs that
are used in the environment? This is a crucial question because LSRM provides the SRM to the user, and
thus, interesting information about the reward structure. This gives the user the ability to make decisions


                                                        17
              Q-Learning                                      QRM                                        QSRM

 1.00                                            1.00                                       1.00
 0.75                                            0.75                                       0.75
 0.50                                            0.50                                       0.50
 0.25                                            0.25                                       0.25
 0.00                                            0.00                                       0.00
          2       4       6          8                  15    30     45        60                  15     30    45        60
                                         ×106                                       ×103                                       ×103
 1.00                                            1.00                                       1.00
 0.75                                            0.75                                       0.75
 0.50                                            0.50                                       0.50
 0.25                                            0.25                                       0.25
 0.00                                            0.00                                       0.00
          2       4       6          8                   20     40        60        80 3            20     40        60        80 3
                                         ×106                                       ×10                                        ×10
                  DQN                                         DQRM                                       DQSRM

 1.00                                            1.00                                       1.00
 0.75                                            0.75                                       0.75
 0.50                                            0.50                                       0.50
 0.25                                            0.25                                       0.25
 0.00                                            0.00                                       0.00
              4       8        12         16            50    100    150       200 3               50    100    150       200 3
                                         ×106                                     ×10                                        ×10
 1.00                                            1.00                                       1.00
 0.75                                            0.75                                       0.75
 0.50                                            0.50                                       0.50
 0.25                                            0.25                                       0.25
 0.00                                            0.00                                       0.00
              4       8         12          16          60    120     180           240 3          60     120    180           240 3
                                         ×106                                        ×10                                        ×10
 1.00                                                                                       1.00
 0.75                                                                                       0.75
 0.50                                                                                       0.50
 0.25                                                                                       0.25
 0.00                                                                                       0.00
          0.5      1.0        1.5         2.0                                                      50     100    150       200 3
                                         ×106                                                                                ×10
Figure 6: Mean10 performance values for the tasks post_inner_offices and diagonal_run in the discrete Office
World (Rows 1-2), and for the tasks post_inner_offices, diagonal_run, and rml in the infinite environments
(Rows 3-5).


                                                               18
        post_inner_offices                              diagonal_run

 1.00                                           1.00
 0.75                                           0.75
 0.50                                           0.50
 0.25                                           0.25
 0.00                                           0.00
         40    80     120         160 3                50     100     150     200 3
                                     ×10                                      ×10
 1.00                                           1.00
 0.75                                           0.75
 0.50                                           0.50
 0.25                                           0.25
 0.00                                           0.00
          60   120     180          240 3              60    120    180     240
                                      ×10                                         ×103
        post_inner_offices                              diagonal_run                                  rml

 1.00                                           1.00                                     1.00
 0.75                                           0.75                                     0.75
 0.50                                           0.50                                     0.50
 0.25                                           0.25                                     0.25
 0.00                                           0.00                                     0.00
         250    500         750         10003          250    500     750     10003             200    400         600      800
                                        ×10                                   ×10                                         ×103
 1.00                                           1.00                                     1.00
 0.75                                           0.75                                     0.75
 0.50                                           0.50                                     0.50
 0.25                                           0.25                                     0.25
 0.00                                           0.00                                     0.00
         0.6   1.2    1.8         2.4     3.0          0.6   1.2     1.8     2.4 6              0.4   0.8    1.2         1.6 6
                                        ×106                                   ×10                                         ×10
Figure 7: LSRM mean10 performance values: Finite state space environment in the upper half and infinite
state space environments in the lower half. The results for LSRM-GF are in the first row and for LSRM-FT
in the second row.




                                                              19
or conclusions about the environment. The figures 8, 9, and 10 show the SRMs that are learned by LSRM
for the task post_inner_offices. Note that only the SRMs for the task post_inner_offices are compared,
since the observations for the other tasks are the same. The SRM that is used in the environment for the
experiment, and thus, is the SRM to compare the learned SRMs by LSRM with, is the SRM in Figure 2b.
For simplicity, we name it SRM-Real in the following. First, we compare the SRMs that are generated by
LSRM-GF. Afterwards, we discuss and analyze the SRMs that are generated by LSRM-FT.


SRMs by LSRM-GF First, we compare the SRMs that LSRM-GF learned. They are visualized in Figure
10. For simplicity, we name the learned SRM in the finite environment SRM-GF-Fin and in the infinite
environment SRM-GF-Inf. We can observe that
 1. SRM-GF-Fin is not equal to SRM-Real. They differ in the aspect that SRM-GF-Fin has one state less
    and the transition with the output 10 is a self-loop in state 2 instead of a new state with a self-loop that
    always outputs 0 as in SRM-Real. Nevertheless, they are almost surely equivalent. All episodes end if the
    goal is reached and a reward of 10 is observed. This means that all episodes end after the SRM uses the
    transition with the output value of 10. Consequently, SRM-GF-Fin and SRM-Real are equivalent on all
    attainable trajectories, and thus, they are almost surely equivalent.
 2. The results and arguments of the previous point 1 also apply in the comparison of SRM-GF-Inf and
    SRM-Real. The difference is that the names of states 1 and 2 are swapped, and the transition that
    outputs a reward of 10 goes back to state 2. Nevertheless, this difference does not change the result that
    SRM-GF-Inf and SRM-Real are not equal but they are almost surely equivalent.

SRMs by LSRM-FT Here, we compare the SRMs that LSRM-FT learned. The SRMs are visualized in
Figure 8 (finite environment) and Figure 9 (infinite environment). For simplicity, we name the learned SRM
in the finite environment SRM-FT-Fin and in the infinite environment SRM-FT-Inf. We can observe that
SRM-FT-Fin and SRM-FT-Inf are both not equal to SRM-Real. The remaining question is whether they are
almost surely equivalent. Here, we distinguish between the comparison to SRM-FT-Fin and SRM-FT-Inf and
can observe that

 1. the formulas that are used as guards differ between SRM-Real and SRM-FT-Fin. However, the only
    reason for this behaviour is that LSRM-FT uses real values for the values in the formula templates and
    LSRM-FT can only observe discrete positions in the finite environment. So, the formulas are equivalent if
    we only consider discrete positions. The additional transitions introduced by the post-processing step
    in Section 4.1 only cover non-discrete positions. In a discrete setting, they remain unused and exist
    only because the completeness check is performed over the full space R. As a result, SRM-Real and
    SRM-FT-Fin are almost surely equivalent according to the definition in Section 4.3.
 2. SRM-Real and SRM-FT-Inf are not almost surely equivalent. Let us consider the transition from state
    0 to state 1 and the self-loop from state 0. SRM-Real and SRM-FT-Inf output a different reward for
    X = {(x, y)|(x ∈ (4.99994980, 5) ∨ x ∈ (6, 6.00046406)) ∧ (y ∈ (5, 5.00200890) ∨ y ∈ (6, 6.00000048))}. The
    probability of a trajectory τ that includes a observation of X in the state-sequence and the SRM is in
    SRM state 0 is greater than 0. Consequently, τ is a counterexample to the claim that SRM-Real and
    SRM-FT-Inf are almost surely equivalent, as the rewards generated by SRM-Real and SRM-FT-Inf differ.
    However, this observation does not break the convergence properties described in Section 4.3 because
    we only run LSRM-FT for a finite number of epochs, while our convergence result holds in the limit.
    However, SRM-FT-Inf is similar to SRM-Real if we compare the structure, transitions and guards. As a
    result, LSRM can train effective policies without an almost surely equivalent SRM.

    Overall, we observe two key points in the evaluation of both LSRM versions. First, our LSRM versions can
infer in almost all cases almost surely equivalent SRMs in comparison to the SRMs used in the environments.
And second, both LSRM versions can learn effective policies that yield good mean10 performance values.




                                                      20
¬(
     (¬¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 5.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
                                                               ¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 6.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
     ¬(¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 6.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6))¬¬)
                                                               ¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 5.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) / 0
                        ∨
                                                     0
     (¬¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 6.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
     (¬¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 5.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6))¬¬)
                                                                               ¬(¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 5.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
¬) / 0
                                                                               ¬(¬(x ≥ 4.5 ∧ x < 6.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6)) / 1
                 ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1 ∧
                 ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1)) / 10                                                        ¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 9.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
                                                                                                                 ¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 10. ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) / 0
                                                     1                                                  2
         ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1) ∧                                                               ¬(
         ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1)) / 0         ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 10..∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6 ∧
                                                                                                                 (¬¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 9.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
                                                         ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 9.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) / 2
                                                                                                                 (¬¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 10. ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6))¬¬)
                                                                                                                                    ∨
                                                                                                                 (¬¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 10. ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6) ∧
                                                                                                                 ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.5 ∧ x < 9.5 ∧ y ≥ 4.5 ∧ y < 6))¬¬)
                                                                                                            ¬) / 0


        Figure 8: Learned SRM by LSRM-FT for task post_inner_offices in the discrete Office World.




                               ¬(x ≥ 4.99 ∧ x < 6.01) ∧
                               ¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01) ∧
                                                                     0                 ¬(¬(x ≥ 4.99 ∧ x < 6.01) ∧
                               ¬(x ≥ 4.99 ∧ x < 6.01) ∧
                                                                                       ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01) ∧
                               ¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01) / 0
                                                                                       ¬(¬(x ≥ 4.99 ∧ x < 6.01) ∧
                                                                                       ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)) / 1

                           ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 0.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 0.99 ∧                                                        ¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 9.99)1∧
                           ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1    ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1)) / 10                                                      ¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)1∧
                                                                                                                            ¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 10.01)∧
                                                                                                                   1        ¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01) / 0

 ¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1) ∧
 ¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 0.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 0.99)) / 0                                                                           ¬(
                                                                                                                            (¬¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 10.01)∧
                                                                         ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 10.01) ∧                        ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)1∧
                                                      2                  ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)1 ∧                        ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 9.99)1∧
                                                                         ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 9.99)1 ∧                        ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01))¬¬)
                                                                         ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)) / 2                                 ∨
        ¬(
                                                                                                                            (¬¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 9.99)1∧
             (¬¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1).99 ∧
                                                                                                                            ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01)1∧
             (¬¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 0.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 0.99))¬¬)
                                                                                                                            ¬(¬(x ≥ 8.99 ∧ x < 10.01)∧
                               ∨
                                                                                                                            ¬(¬(y ≥ 5.01 ∧ y < 6.01))¬¬)
             (¬¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 0.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 0.99) ∧
                                                                                                                       ¬) / 0
             ¬(¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1.99 ∧ y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1)).99¬¬)
        ¬) / 0




Figure 9: Learned SRM by LSRM-FT for task post_inner_offices in the continuous Office World. For better
                                                     ′
                                           ( round that rounds the input value to two decimal places. The
visualization, we apply our rounding function
                                             ⌊x·100⌋
                                                       , if ⌊x · 100⌋ mod 10 ≥ 5,
function round′ is defined by round′ (x) = ⌈x·100⌉
                                               100

                                               100     , if ⌊x · 100⌋ mod 10 < 5.
The learned SRM is even closer to the SRM used in the environment than the one visualized in this figure.




                                                                             21
                   ¬(x ≥ 5 ∧ x < 6 ∧                                                             ¬(x ≥ 5 ∧ x < 6 ∧
                   ¬(y ≥ 5 ∧ y < 6) / 0                                                          ¬(y ≥ 5 ∧ y < 6) / 0


                           0                                                                             0

       x≥5∧x<6∧                         x≥0∧x<1∧                                     x≥5∧x<6∧                           x≥0∧x<1∧
       y≥5∧y<6/1                        y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1 / 10                           y≥5∧y<6/1                          y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1 / 10


                           1                      2                                                      2                      1
                               x ≥ 9 ∧ x < 10 ∧                                                              x ≥ 9 ∧ x < 10 ∧
    ¬(x ≥ 9 ∧ x < 10 ∧         y≥5∧y<6/2              ¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧           ¬(x ≥ 9 ∧ x < 10 ∧         y≥5∧y<6/2              ¬(x ≥ 0 ∧ x < 1 ∧
    ¬(y ≥ 5 ∧ y < 6) / 0                              ¬(y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1) / 0        ¬(y ≥ 5 ∧ y < 6) / 0                              ¬(y ≥ 0 ∧ y < 1) / 0

                    (a) Discrete Office World                                                  (b) Continuous Office World

Figure 10: Learned SRMs by LSRM-GF for task post_inner_offices in the discrete and continuous Office
World.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced SRMs as a novel method to represent non-Markovian reward functions. They
are more flexible than RMs and only require the standard MDP definition in RL. Furthermore, the formulas
that are used as guards in the SRM are more interpretable for the user and do not require generic labels
in the environment as opposed to RMs. Based on this novel concept we developed (D)QSRM and LSRM,
two powerful methods which leverage the SRM structure to learn policies efficiently. In the experimental
evaluation, we demonstrate their applicability, capability and effectiveness to yield good mean10 performance
values. LSRM-FT provides the possibility to infer semantic information (symbolic formulas/guards) about
the reward function automatically. Accordingly, the user receives important and useful information about the
hidden reward function.


Acknowledgements

This work has been financially supported by the Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security
(https://rc-trust.ai), one of the Research Alliance centers within the UA Ruhr (https://uaruhr.de). We also
thank Jan Corazza and Simon Lutz for helpful discussions and suggestions.


References
 1. Ardon, L., Furelos-Blanco, D., Parac, R., Russo, A.: Form: Learning expressive and transferable first-order logic
    reward machines. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
    Systems. p. 142–151. AAMAS ’25, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
    Richland, SC (2025)
 2. Bester, T., Rosman, B., James, S., Tasse, G.N.: Counting reward automata: Sample efficient reinforcement learning
    through the exploitation of reward function structure. In: Neuro-Symbolic Learning and Reasoning in the era of
    Large Language Models (2023), https://openreview.net/forum?id=XfXLM8uIxH
 3. Corazza, J., Gavran, I., Neider, D.: Reinforcement learning with stochastic reward machines. Proceedings of the
    AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 36(6), 6429–6436 (Jun 2022). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i6.20594,
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i6.20594
 4. D’Antoni, L., Veanes, M.: The power of symbolic automata and transducers. In: Majumdar, R., Kunčak, V. (eds.)
    Computer aided verification, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10426, pp. 47–67. Springer, Cham (2017).
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-63387-9_3
 5. Icarte, R.T., Klassen, T., Valenzano, R., McIlraith, S.: Using reward machines for high-level task specification
    and decomposition in reinforcement learning. In: Dy, J., Krause, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 35th International


                                                                             22
    Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80, pp. 2107–2116. PMLR
    (2018), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/icarte18a.html
 6. Kaelbling, L.P., Littman, M.L., Moore, A.W.: Reinforcement learning: A survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
    Research 4, 237–285 (1996). https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.301
 7. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A.A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M.G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M.,
    Fidjeland, A.K., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D.,
    Wierstra, D., Legg, S., Hassabis, D.: Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518(7540),
    529–533 (Feb 2015), http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14236
 8. Monniaux, D.: A survey of satisfiability modulo theory. In: Gerdt, V.P., Koepf, W., Seiler, W.M., Vorozhtsov, E.V.
    (eds.) Computer Algebra in Scientific Computing. pp. 401–425. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016)
 9. Moore, A.W.: Efficient memory-based learning for robot control (1990). https://doi.org/10.48456/TR-209
10. de Moura, L., Bjørner, N.: Z3: An efficient smt solver. In: Ramakrishnan, C.R., Rehof, J. (eds.) Tools and
    Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. pp. 337–340. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
    Heidelberg (2008)
11. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga,
    L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang,
    L., Bai, J., Chintala, S.: Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In: Wallach, H.,
    Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information
    Processing Systems. vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc. (2019), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
    2019/file/bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf
12. Puterman, M.L.: Chapter 8 markov decision processes. In: Heyman, D.P., Sobel, M.J. (eds.) Stochastic models,
    Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science, vol. 2, pp. 331–434. North-Holland, Amsterdam
    and New York and New York, NY, U.S.A (1990). https://doi.org/10.1016/S0927-0507(05)80172-0
13. Sutton, R.S., Barto, A.: Reinforcement learning: An introduction. Adaptive computation and machine learning,
    The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England, second edition edn. (2020)
14. Toro Icarte, R., Klassen, T.Q., Valenzano, R., McIlraith, S.A.: Reward machines: Exploiting reward function
    structure in reinforcement learning. J. Artif. Int. Res. 73 (May 2022). https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.12440,
    https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.12440
15. Towers, M., Kwiatkowski, A., Balis, J.U., Cola, G.D., Deleu, T., Goulão, M., Andreas, K., Krimmel, M., KG, A.,
    Perez-Vicente, R.D.L., Terry, J.K., Pierré, A., Schulhoff, S.V., Tai, J.J., Tan, H., Younis, O.G.: Gymnasium: A
    standard interface for reinforcement learning environments. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural
    Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (2025), https://openreview.net/forum?id=
    qPMLvJxtPK
16. Varricchione, G., Klassen, T.Q., Alechina, N., Dastani, M., Logan, B., McIlraith, S.A.: Pushdown Reward
    Machines for Reinforcement Learning. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Principles of
    Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. pp. 566–576 (10 2025). https://doi.org/10.24963/kr.2025/55, https:
    //doi.org/10.24963/kr.2025/55
17. Veanes, M.: Applications of symbolic finite automata. In: Konstantinidis, S. (ed.) Implementation and Application
    of Automata. pp. 16–23. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2013)
18. Watkins, Christopher J. C. H., Dayan, P.: Q-learning. Machine Learning 8(3-4), 279–292 (1992). https://doi.org/
    10.1007/BF00992698, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00992698
19. Xu, Z., Gavran, I., Ahmad, Y., Majumdar, R., Neider, D., Topcu, U., Wu, B.: Joint inference of reward machines
    and policies for reinforcement learning. Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated Planning and
    Scheduling 30(1), 590–598 (Jun 2020). https://doi.org/10.1609/icaps.v30i1.6756, https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
    ICAPS/article/view/6756
20. Zhou, W., Li, W.: A hierarchical Bayesian approach to inverse reinforcement learning with symbolic reward
    machines. In: Chaudhuri, K., Jegelka, S., Song, L., Szepesvari, C., Niu, G., Sabato, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the
    39th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 162, pp.
    27159–27178. PMLR (17–23 Jul 2022), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/zhou22b.html




                                                          23
