                                             Expediting Reinforcement Learning by Incorporating
                                                 Knowledge About Temporal Causality in the
                                                                Environment

                                                    Jan Corazza1,2 , Hadi Partovi Aria3 , Daniel Neider1,2 , and Zhe Xu3⋆
                                                                             1
                                                                           TU Dortmund University
                                                             2
                                                             Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security




arXiv:2510.15456v1 [cs.LG] 17 Oct 2025
                                                          {jan.corazza,daniel.neider}@tu-dortmund.de
                                                                         3
                                                                           Arizona State University
                                                                     {hpartovi,xzhe1}@asu.edu



                                                  Abstract. Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms struggle with learning optimal
                                                  policies for tasks where reward feedback is sparse and depends on a complex
                                                  sequence of events in the environment. Probabilistic reward machines (PRMs)
                                                  are finite-state formalisms that can capture temporal dependencies in the reward
                                                  signal, along with nondeterministic task outcomes. While special RL algorithms
                                                  can exploit this finite-state structure to expedite learning, PRMs remain difficult
                                                  to modify and design by hand. This hinders the already difficult tasks of utilizing
                                                  high-level causal knowledge about the environment, and transferring the reward
                                                  formalism into a new domain with a different causal structure. This paper pro-
                                                  poses a novel method to incorporate causal information in the form of Temporal
                                                  Logic-based Causal Diagrams into the reward formalism, thereby expediting pol-
                                                  icy learning and aiding the transfer of task specifications to new environments.
                                                  Furthermore, we provide a theoretical result about convergence to optimal policy
                                                  for our method, and demonstrate its strengths empirically.

                                                  Keywords: Temporal Causality · Reinforcement Learning · Probabilistic Reward
                                                  Machines · Formal Methods.


                                         1     Introduction

                                         Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as the forefront method in providing a robust
                                         and general framework for intelligent, autonomous decision-making and learning within
                                         complex environments. One of the biggest challenges in Reinforcement Learning is
                                         integrating high-level, causal knowledge into the learning process. Causal reasoning may
                                         come naturally to humans, assisting them in navigating the world by making decisions
                                         based on more than just observed outcomes; it involves an understanding of how those
                                         outcomes come about. This is in contrast to traditional RL techniques, which often
                                         lack the ability to capture temporal cause-effect relationships and hence offer inefficient
                                         ⋆
                                             A peer-reviewed version appears in the Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning
                                             and Reasoning (PMLR 236:643-664, 2024) [2]. Please cite the proceedings version. Source
                                             code: https://github.com/corazza/tcrl.
2       J. Corazza et al.

learning and decision-making. For instance, the knowledge of the likely consequences
of actions in terms of future states and rewards can dramatically reduce the amount of
exploration that needs to take place to learn effective policies. This problem is most
evident in settings with long-term consequences, which calls for RL methods that could
incorporate causal knowledge directly into their decision process.
    In RL the interaction between the agent and the environment happens step by step.
Starting in state s the agent chooses an action a with probability π(a | s) (the policy),
and the environment transitions into a new state s′ and gives a reward r. This interaction
is formalized in the concept of an MDP, a tuple M = (S, A, R, p, γ) where S is the
set of states, A the set of actions available to the agent, R : (S × A)⋆ × S → R the
reward function mapping trajectories in the MDP to rewards, p(s′ | s, a) a probabilistic
transition function, and γ ∈ (0, 1) the discount
                                             P∞factor. The agent’s goal is to maximize
the expected discounted return, maxπ Eπ [ i=0 γ i ri ]. A labeling function L(s, a, s′ )
can be provided to attach descriptive propositional variables to transitions in the MDP.
An MDP together with a labeling function is called a labeled MDP.
    Although MDPs can have a large number of states and a complex transition function,
one often has access to high-level causal knowledge of the environment. Figure 1(a)
illustrates this point on a small example MDP. To complete the task, the agent must
choose to bring either coffee or a soda to the office. The high-level knowledge one
may supply is that any path from the soda to the office is later blocked by a flower pot,
which the agent must avoid. This is due to walls and a one-way door, which constrain
the agent’s movement. Although special RL algorithms can find the optimal policy for
this task, they will not take these temporal-causal constraints into account, and will
explore the environment in an inefficient manner. Unfortunately, employing high-level
knowledge about causality has shown to be a difficult task, as the current causal RL
approaches (e.g., [16,9,14,1,7,10,4,8]) mostly do not take into account the temporal
aspect of the causal knowledge. This paper aims to address this issue by proposing
a novel method that incorporates knowledge about causality directly into the reward
function. On the other hand, den Hengst et al. [5] propose an approach for safe RL that
incorporates symbolic reasoning and a temporal domain. However, their primary focus
is on ensuring safety rather than expediting the learning process, distinguishing their
work from ours, which specifically targets efficient learning by leveraging causality.

1.1   Probabilistic Reward Machines
Common RL algorithms such as Q-learning struggle with tasks where rewards are
sparse and depend on a complex sequence of actions that the agent must perform in
a specific order. Reward machines, introduced by Icarte et al. [6], are a finite-state
formalism that can capture the reward function in such cases. Q-learning for Reward
Machines (QRM), as proposed by Icarte et al. [6], can exploit this reward structure to
expedite learning the optimal policy. The QRM algorithm employs reward machines
to significantly enhance the efficiency of problem-solving processes. This algorithm
applies an off-policy Q-learning strategy to the reward machine by decomposing it into
relevant components at the same time, thereby facilitating the simultaneous learning of
each distinct subpolicy. This methodological approach has been empirically validated,
demonstrating the algorithm’s capability to converge towards an optimal policy in tabular
                                       Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning                      3


                                                       ¬(c ∨ s), 0                           ¬o, 0
                                                                                 c ∧ ¬s, 0
                     f            o                                q0                               q1
                                                                                    0.9
                                                                            c
              s                                                                  ,0
                                                                            ∧ ¬s
                                                                                0.1
                           c
                                                                     s, 0           q2                   o, 1
                                                                                           o
                                                                                             ,0
                                                                                ¬o, 0          .1
                    Æ                                 ¬o, 0        q3               o, 1            q4

(a) A labeled 5x5 Gridworld with coffee (c),
soda (s), an office (o), and a flower pot (f).
                                                     (b) A PRM for the task in Figure 1(a) (left).
The agent can move in the four cardinal direc-
                                                     Transitions are labeled with propositional
tions, and starts in the cell labeled Æ. Other
                                                     formulas and reward outputs. Only transi-
shaded cells are impassable walls. One-way
                                                     tion probabilities different from 1 are shown.
doors are represented by the upwards arrow.
                                                     State q4 is a terminal state which ends the
The flower pot acts as a sink state.
                                                     task. Formulas on transitions from q0 to q1
                                                     and q2 (c∧¬s) contain ¬s in order to disam-
                                                     biguate the transition function in state q0 on
                                                     the input {c, s}. The same could be achieved
                                                     by using the formula ¬c∧s for the transition
                                                     from q0 to q3 , and just c for transitions into
                                                     q1 , q2 .

Fig. 1. An MDP (left) and a PRM (right) that captures the task of bringing either coffee or soda to
the office. The coffee machine has a probability of 10% to malfunction and produce bad coffee,
leading to a reduced reward of 0.1 instead of 1. Bringing soda to the office results in a reward of
1 deterministically. An example input for the PRM is {c, s}, ∅, {o, c} (a sequence of three
labels), which will induce the run q0 7→ q3 7→ q3 7→ q4 with a reward of 1. It is important to note
that inputs for PRMs are sets of descriptive propositional variables that are true in a given step,
hence why a single label such as {c, s} can include multiple (or 0) variables.


case. Velasquez et al. [13] introduced a more general variant of reward machines called
probabilistic reward machines (PRMs). PRMs use a nondeterministic transition function
that can capture uncertainty in task outcomes. In the example from Figure 1, uncertainty
comes from the fact that the coffee machine may malfunction. Definition 1 formalizes
this notion of a finite-state representation of a temporally extended task with probabilistic
outcomes.

Definition 1 (Probabilistic Reward Machine (PRM)). A PRM A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ,
σ, F ) is a tuple where U is a finite set of states with a distinguished initial state uI ∈ U ,
AP is a set of atomic propositions and 2AP is the set of labels, Γ ⊂ R is a finite
set of rewards, τ : (U × 2AP × U ) → [0, 1] is a probabilistic transition function,
σ : (U × 2AP × U ) → Γ is a function mapping each transition to a reward in Γ , and
F ⊆ U is a finite set of terminal states that signal the end of the interaction.
4        J. Corazza et al.

     The agent-environment interaction generates a trajectory s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , an−1 , sn
and the corresponding label sequence ℓ0 ℓ1 · · · ℓn−1 , where L(si , ai , si+1 ) = ℓi for all
i = 0, . . . , n − 1. The state s0 may be a unique initial state, or drawn from an initial
distribution. After reading a label ℓ in state u, the PRM executes a nondeterministic
transition into a new state u′ with probability τ (u, ℓ, u′ ), and the agent receives a reward
r = σ(u, ℓ, u′ ). A run of a PRM A on a label sequence ℓ0 ℓ1 · · · ℓn−1 is a sequence
u0 , r0 , u1 , . . . , rn−1 , un where u0 = uI , and for all i = 0, . . . , n−1, τ (ui , ℓi , ui+1 ) > 0
and σ(ui , ℓi , ui+1 ) = ri .

1.2   Temporal Logic-based Causal Diagrams
Linear temporal logic over finite sequences (LTLf ) is a formal reasoning system that
can capture causal and temporal properties of label sequences and labeled MDPs. Aside
from Boolean operators like ¬ and ∨, LTLf introduces temporal operators such as Gψ
(true if and only if ψ holds for every element in the sequence), Xψ (true iff. ψ holds
for the next element of the sequence), and ψUφ (true iff. ψ holds until φ becomes true,
and φ is true in some element of the sequence). We also rely on the weak until operator
ψWφ (true iff. ψ holds until φ becomes true, but φ is not required to become true).
    In order to encode knowledge about causality in the underlying MDP, we rely on
Temporal Logic-based Causal Diagrams (TL-CDs) introduced in Paliwal et al. [11].
TL-CDs are a special notation that expresses the causal relationship between formulas in
LTLf . The first conjunct induced by the TL-CD in Figure 2(a), G(s → ¬oWf), means
that if the agent observes s (soda) in any step, then it will not observe o (the office)
before it observes f (the flower pot). This part of the TL-CD encodes knowledge that
soda may only be reached via a one-way door, and the only other exit towards the office
will be blocked by the flower pot.



            s             ¬oWf

                                                                     a              G¬b

            f                G¬o                                      (b) G(a → G¬b)

    (a) G(s → ¬oWf) ∧ G(f → G¬o)

Fig. 2. Figure 2(a) (left) is the TL-CD which captures relevant causal information in the environ-
ment from Figure 1(a). Figure 2(b) (right) is a TL-CD that holds for the case study in Figure 6.


   Formally, a TL-CD is a directed graph whose nodes are labeled with LTLf formulas.
For a TL-CD C one may construct an equivalent LTLf formula φC through Equation 1,
where φ ▶ ψ iterates over edges that connect formulas φ and ψ in the TL-CD.
                                       ^
                               φC =       G(φ → ψ)                              (1)
                                              φ▶ψ
                                        Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning               5

     If φC is true for a label sequence ℓ, we will write ℓ |= φC . A label sequence
ℓ = ℓ0 ℓ1 · · · ℓn−1 is attainable in an MDP M = (S, A, R, p, γ) if there exists a trajectory
s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , an−1 , sn in M such that L(si , ai , si+1 ) = ℓi and p(si , ai , si+1 ) > 0 for
all i = 0, 1, . . . , n − 1. We will say that a TL-CD C holds for an MDP M if for every
label sequence ℓ attainable in M , we have ℓ |= φC . In order to simplify working with
TL-CDs, we leverage the notion of deterministic finite automata (DFAs). We formalize
this notion in Definition 2.
Definition 2 (Deterministic Finite Automaton (DFA)). A DFA is a tuple C = (Q, qI , Σ,
δ, F ) consisting of a finite set of states Q with an initial state qI , input alphabet Σ, deter-
ministic transition function δ : Q × Σ → Q, and a finite set of accepting states F ⊆ Q.


    If the run of the DFA C on an input string ℓ ends in an accepting state q ∈ F , we
will write ℓ ∈ L(C). Every TL-CD C can be converted into an equivalent DFA C, in the
sense that for every ℓ, we have ℓ ∈ L(C) ⇐⇒ ℓ |= φC . We will refer to C as the causal
DFA.


2    Problem statement
One may use QRM to find the optimal policy for the task in Figure 1. However, the PRM
in Figure 1(b) does not take flower pots and one-way doors into account. Because the
agent does not know that knocking over flower pots is forbidden or that choosing soda
causes him to enter a room blocked by a flower pot, it will waste time exploring those
fruitless trajectories. As PRMs are in essence task specifications, and one may also wish
to transfer them into a new environment while preserving the overall goal. In both cases,
high-level insights about causality, especially its temporal aspects, could prove helpful
by reflecting the dynamics of the MDP in condensed form.
     Unfortunately, incorporating knowledge about temporal causality into the reward
function remains a difficult and error-prone manual task. In PRMs, this would necessitate
adding new states and reasoning about a different, more complicated transition function.
Some methods such as JIRP, proposed by Xu et al. [15] and SRMI, proposed by Corazza
et al. [3] assume that a suitable but unknown representation of the reward function exists,
and attempt to recover it from interaction traces. This work proposes an alternative
method that leverages TL-CDs in order to automate the process of incorporating knowl-
edge about causality into PRMs. More formally, the problem can be stated as follows.
Given a TL-CD C which holds for an MDP M and a PRM A, produce a PRM B that
induces the same optimal policy as A, but utilizes causal information in C to expedite
learning.


3    Method
This section introduces a novel approach for incorporating causal information from a
TL-CD into the reinforcement learning process via a PRM. By creating a product of a
TL-CD, represented as a causal DFA, with a PRM, we aim to enhance the RL agent’s
ability to efficiently learn and make decisions in complex environments.
6        J. Corazza et al.

    We first consider the equivalent causal DFA for a given TL-CD. As explained
in Section 1.2, the equivalent causal DFA captures the same semantics as the given
TL-CD. While TL-CDs are an intuitive notational tool, DFAs are easier to work with
computationally. The causal DFA for the TL-CD in Figure 2(a) is shown in Figure 3
(in two parts for convenience). State u3 is a sink state, meaning that any run of the
DFA which enters u3 will never leave it. It is also a rejecting state. Taken together, this
means that any label sequence for which the causal DFA enters u3 is not the prefix of an
attainable sequence in an MDP M if we assume that the TL-CD holds for M .


      ¬s            ¬f ∧ ¬o           ⊤

               s              f                                   f               o
      u0               u1             u2                  t0              t1             t2

                      o
                                                          ¬f             ¬o               ⊤
                       u3      ⊤
                                                                (b) G(f → G¬o)

           (a) G(s → ¬oWf)

Fig. 3. Two factors of the causal DFA for the TL-CD in Figure 2(a). Rejecting sink states are
diamond-shaped. Their parallel composition is the true causal DFA, and its states come from the
Cartesian product of states in this Figure. For example, the initial state is (u0 , t0 ).



    In other words, when a causal DFA run reaches a rejecting sink state on some prefix
of input labels, then the entire input label sequence is unattainable. The reason is that
there is no suffix of labels which can cause the run to transition into an accepting state.
From now on we will implicitly consider causal DFAs to have at most one rejecting sink
state, and that an accepting state is reachable from all other states. This can be achieved
by minimization [12].
    We propose to incorporate causal information from a TL-CD C into a PRM A by
computing state values in a new PRM B1 = C × A, which is a product of the TL-CD
(represented by the causal DFA C) and A. The product PRM B1 synchronizes the runs
of the original PRM A and the causal DFA C. B1 mirrors the output of A, except when
C transitions into a rejecting sink state. Then the output of B1 is set to a minimal value
m that is lesser than any possible immediate reward and resulting future gain, and will
remain there for the rest of the run as C will not leave the sink state. We also compute
state values in a “pessimistic” PRM B2 = C × (−A) in order to uncover temporal-causal
information about worst-case reward outcomes. While B1 outputs the same rewards as A,
B2 negates outputs of A (but also gives minimal outputs m for transitions into rejecting
sink states). Because of the minimal reward output m, value iteration in either B1 or
B2 will disregard transitions that lead C into a rejecting sink state, as explained under
Figure 4. Due to negating reward outputs, label sequences that maximize return in B2 ,
minimize the return in B1 . We combine state value information from B1 and B2 into a
                                            Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning            7

final PRM B. To obtain B, we start from B1 , and add all states u ∈ U B1 that have 0 value
in both the machine B1 and B2 (vB⋆ 1 (u) = vB⋆ 2 (u) = 0) into the set of terminal states F B1 .
Such states have the property that no matter the policy, the future return is constrained
with 0 from above and below (and thus, the choice of actions is of no consequence). The
product C × A is formalized in Definition 3. We define the value of a PRM state u via
the Bellman optimality equation 2, where γ matches the discount factor in the MDP.
                              X
               v ⋆ (u) = max         τ (u, ℓ, u′ ) · (σ (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γv ⋆ (u′ ))          (2)
                            ℓ∈2AP
                                    u′ ∈U

    As Equation 2 is an optimality equation, v ⋆ (u) is the expected return of a PRM
run starting in u and following the most optimistic label sequence (which may or
may not be attainable in the MDP). We define the minimal reward output m as m =
−1 − maxr∈Γ A |r| − maxu∈U A v ⋆ (u). While it may be simpler to use m = −∞, we
compute a concrete bound in order to better communicate how our method makes use of
state value information. In brief, the formula for m is inspired by the Bellman optimality
operator used in value iteration. The terms can be explained in the following way. First,
− maxr∈Γ A |r| ensures that the reward is lower than any other immediate reward in
the original PRM. Second, − maxu∈U A v ⋆ (u) ensures that the reward is lower than any
possible future gain starting from a state in the original PRM. Taken together, these two
terms ensure that transitions that correspond to rejecting sink states do not contribute to
state values.

Definition 3 (PRM & TL-CD product). Let M = (S, A, R, p, γ) be an MDP where
the reward function R : (2AP )⋆ → Γ is given by the PRM A = (U A , uAI , 2AP , Γ A , τ A , σ A ,
F A ), C a TL-CD that holds for M , and C = (Q, qI , 2AP , δ, FC ) its equivalent minimal
causal DFA with states Q, initial state qI , a set of accepting states FC ⊆ Q, and
transition function δ. Let Qr.s. ⊆ Q \ FC be the set of rejecting sink states of C.
    We define the product C × A as a new PRM (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ), where

 1. U = U A × Q, a state of C × A is a pair of states (u, q) with u ∈ U A and q ∈ Q;
 2. uI = (uAI , qI ), the initial state in C × A is the pair of initial states of A and C;
 3. Γ = Γ A ∪ {m}, the output alphabet of C × A is expanded with a possible reward
    output that is 1 less than any output in the original set of rewards from A;
 4. τ ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) = τ A (u, ℓ, u′ ) · 1{δ(q,ℓ)=q′ } , the probability of C × A transi-
    tioning from (u, q) to (u′ , q ′ ) upon reading ℓ is the same as the probability of A
    transitioning from u to u′ , given that C transitions from q to q ′ (otherwise, the
    probability is 0);            (
                                     σ A (u, ℓ, u′ )                                     q ′ ̸∈ Qr.s.
 5. σ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) =                                                                       ,
                                     m = −1 − maxr∈Γ A |r| − maxu∈U A v ⋆ (u) otherwise
    the output of the product PRM agrees with A except when C transitions into a
    rejecting sink state; and
 6. F = {(u, q) : u ∈ F A }, terminal states in C × A correspond to terminal states in A.


   Performing value iteration acts as a form of look-ahead in the product C × A, whose
output function is defined so that transitions which lead the causal DFA into a rejecting
8          J. Corazza et al.

sink state do not contribute to overall state value. The same is true for B2 = C × (−A),
which is defined in the same way, except the output function −σ A (u, ℓ, u′ ) provides
look-ahead information about the worst-case future outcome. Our method, given in
Algorithm 1, improves the convergence speed of QRM by utilizing information about
expected rewards that better reflects the temporal causal structure of the environment. In
Theorem 1 we show that our method converges to the optimal policy in the limit.


                                    ¬(o ∨ f), 0                   x2
                                                             1
                                                       o, −
                                      s, 0
                               x0               x1                                  x4
                                                         f, 0                 1
                                                                         o, −
                                                     ¬o, 0        x3


Fig. 4. A fragment of the product of the PRM from Figure 1(b) and the TL-CD from Figure 2(a).
Inheriting the q, u, and t names of PRM and causal DFA states from previous figures, x0 =
(q0 , u0 , t0 ), x1 = (q3 , u1 , t0 ), x2 = (q4 , u3 , t0 ), x3 = (q3 , u2 , t1 ), and x4 = (q4 , u2 , t2 ). Due
to the maximum in Equation 2, dashed transitions do not contribute to state value. Dashed states
x1 and x3 have 0 value in both B1 (depicted) and B2 , and will be added to the set of terminal
states.




    Require :MDP M , PRM A, minimal causal DFA C with rejecting sink states Qr.s.
    B1 , B2 ← computeProduct(A, C), computeProduct(−A, C)
    1
     ⋆     ⋆
  2 vB1 , vB2 ← valueIteration(B1 , γ), valueIteration(B2 , γ)
  3 B ← B1
                     B
  4 for each u ∈ U do
  5      if vB1 (u) = vB⋆2 (u) = 0 then
             ⋆

  6           Add u to the set of terminal states of B
  7      end
  8 end
  9 Q ← initializeQFunction()
 10 while termination criteria not met do
 11      Q ← RunQRMEpisode(Q, B)
 12 end
 13 return Q
        Algorithm 1: Reinforcement Learning With Temporal-Causal Information



Theorem 1 (Convergence to Optimal Policy) Let M be an MDP with a non-Markovian
reward function captured by PRM A. Let C be a TL-CD that holds for M , and C the
corresponding minimal causal DFA with rejecting sink states Qr.s. . Then Algorithm 1
converges to an optimal policy for M with respect to A. In particular, we can easily
                                   Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning         9

recover the optimal policy for (M, A) from the optimal policy for (M, B) found in the
algorithm.

    In the full proof of Theorem 1, we introduce 3 transformations on PRMs that realize
our method of combining a PRM with a TL-CD. In brief, these transformations allow
us to (1) take the parallel composition of a PRM and a DFA, (2) change the outputs of
PRMs on transitions into unreachable states, and (3) add states into the set of terminal
states of the PRM (under certain conditions); all the while preserving the optimal policy.
We then show how Algorithm 1 applies these transformations in order to arrive at the
desired PRM B. Since these transformations preserve the optimal policy (or allow for
easy recovery of it), we conclude that QRM using the transformed PRM B converges
to the optimal policy. In brief, the core contribution of the modifications we propose
lies in the ability to exploit causal knowledge contained in the TL-CD. Although we
significantly change the structure of PRM by combining it with the TL-CD, we prove
that the optimal policy remains the same. However, the changed structure allows for a
more nuanced calculation of PRM state values that is not blind to the temporal-causal
relations that hold for the MDP. More precisely, we are able to obtain upper and lower
bounds on state values, and prove that under certain conditions one does not need to
explore the MDP (specifically, when both the upper and lower value bounds are 0). In
doing so, we improve the balance between exploration and exploitation and increase
the sample efficiency of our algorithm. See the Appendix for further details about the
function that computes the PRM and causal DFA intermediate product, and the full proof
of Theorem 1.


4   Case Studies

Our method shows promising results across two case studies. The first case study (results
in Figure 5(a)) is based on the coffee vs. soda example from Figure 1. The second case
study (results in Figure 5(b)) is described in Figure 2.
    We compared our method against QRM without access to knowledge about causality.
In both case studies, our method takes significantly fewer steps to converge to the optimal
policy.
    For a more thorough comparison and analysis of the method’s efficiency, we im-
plemented it across two distinct case studies: a four-door task and a small office world
domain. The third case study entails an agent navigating through a scenario where it
must open four doors in any arbitrary order, as illustrated in Figure 7(a). This task
involves a significantly more complex PRM owing to the number of possible orders.
To evaluate the method’s performance and its efficacy in this case study, we use a grid
world configuration of 6 × 6.
    The agent here must open door A, door B, door C, and door D in any order. However,
door D is a trap, and the agent cannot see doors A, B, or even C after seeing door D.
This knowledge, in fact, is encoded in Figure 7(b). As this task requires a complex
Probabilistic Reward Machine (PRM), we deemed it prudent to relegate its detailed
explanation to the Appendix.
10                    J. Corazza et al.


                                  No causal




  Reward per step
                    100            Causal                  60

                                                           40
                     50
                                                           20

                      0                                     0
                           0                 1         2        0            2             4
                                            Step       4
                                                     ·10                    Step         ·104
                          (a) Coffee vs. soda task                  (b) Two-doors task

Fig. 5. Reward per step averaged over 20 runs. “No causal” refers to using QRM with the original
PRM that does not account for additional causal information in the environment. “Causal” are the
results for our method. Both graphs showcase QRM convergence to the optimal policy.




    Furthermore, Figure 9(a) compares our method on the four-doors task to QRM
without additional causal information. It can be seen that QRM with causal information
results in much higher rewards with faster convergence.
    Another case study in which we implemented this method is the small office world
domain. For this specific exploration, we considered a small office world with a spatial
layout of 17 × 9, similar to the setup in Paliwal et al. [11]. Within the scope of this
case study, the procedure to exit the grid entails a two-step process for the agent: first,
it must obtain one of the two available keys, denoted as k1 or k2 , and then navigate to
exit e1 or e2 , correspondingly aligned with the key acquired. Through one-way doors
(indicated by blue arrows), keys, and walls, the agent interacts with the environment.
A graphical illustration of this environment, capturing the elements and challenges the
agent faces, is provided in Figure 8(a), providing a better understanding of the structural
and operational complexities of the small office world being explored.
     As a result of c being a one-way door, the agent will not be able to pick up key k2
and exit at e2 , due to the information encoded in Figure 8(c). In addition, if the agent
passes through the door b, it will not be able to exit through the door e1 . Furthermore,
Figure 8(b) displays the PRM, omitting the causal information regarding the small office
world. In order to succeed in exiting the maze and receiving reward 1, the agent must
complete both sequences a−k1 − e1 (open door a, pick up key k1 , and leave at e1 ) or
b−k2 − e2 (open door b, pick up key k2 , and exit at e2 ). However, a probability of 0.9
suggests a likelihood of the agent exiting through e1 , while a probability of 0.1 indicates
a risk of the agent getting stuck.
   Figure 9(b) depicts the performance comparison of our method on the small office
world scenario to QRM without additional causal information. In the figure, it can be
seen that if the RL agent knows the causal DFA and learns never to open door b, the
agent can obtain their optimal reward faster with higher accumulated rewards.
                                       Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning               11


                                                        ¬(a ∨ b), 0           q1
             a               b                                         0              b,
                                                                   a ,                    1
                                                                         . 9       0. 9
                                                                       0
                                                            q0               ¬b, 0            q4
                                                                     b,                 1
                                                                         0         a  ,
                                                                  0.9
                    Æ                                                                   0.9
                                                                              q2        ¬a, 0

(a) 3x3 Gridworld environment where the               (b) The PRM without causal info about the
agent must open both door A (a) and door              two-door task. Missing transitions are all self-
B (b) in any order. However, the cell with            loops with probability 0.1.
door A traps the agent. The agent can fail at
opening the doors with probability 0.1.

Fig. 6. The MDP and PRM for the second case study. The TL-CD that adds causal information
regarding the sink door A can be found on Figure 2(b). It states that after seeing door A, the agent
can not later see door B.


4.1   Performance Impact of Proposed Modifications
Our method makes significant structural changes to the underlying PRM in order to
incorporate temporal-causal information contained in TL-CDs. One of the primary effects
of these changes is increasing the size of the state space. Despite this increase in size,
experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm improves convergence properties on
realistic examples when the provided information is useful (allows for pruning redundant
paths from the PRM where exploration is not necessary). Strictly speaking, however, we
only require that the causal diagrams are correct (that they hold for the MDP), not that
they contain useful information.
    Being robust to mistakes and imprecisions in user-provided causal information (or
even malicious inputs) is beneficial. We hypothesize that our algorithm possesses this
property, in the sense that its performance does not diminish in the presence of useless
or redundant knowledge. In order to check this, we re-ran our experiments in this
more difficult setting of perturbed user input. We added useless and redundant causal
knowledge, by including an additional factor in the causal DFA product. More precisely,
we called computeProduct an additional time with a redundant causal DFA with no
rejecting sink states. This factor injects no new useful causal information, but increases
the state space size 5 times. The results we obtained were fully in line with the ones
presented in our case studies, i.e. the improved convergence rate enabled by our method
was retained. In conclusion, our algorithm can handle useless or redundant knowledge,
and its performance is not diminished by it. We showcase these results in Figure 10.
    We make two additional observations relating to state space size.
 1. PRMs themselves already provide an immense reduction in state space size, because
    the policy no longer has to consider the whole history. Instead, the PRM state acts
    as a form of finite memory in the MDP.
 2. Our method is based on removing redundant paths from the PRM (those where
    exploration is not necessary).
12        J. Corazza et al.

                                  c


                       Æ                                  d             G¬(a ∨ b ∨ c)
                                  d


         a                        b
                                                    (b) TL-CD that holds for the case study of
(a) 6x6 Gridworld environment where the             four-doors task.
agent must open door A (a), door B (b), door
C (c), and door D (d) in any order. However,
the cell with door D traps the agent. The
agent may fail to open door B with a proba-
bility of 0.1, and it will go to door D instead.

                    Fig. 7. The MDP and Causal DFA for the third case study.


    We want to further drive home the point that while using PRMs and incorporating
causal information as we propose does contribute to an increased state space, the resulting
performance benefits more than outweigh the costs (and, as our additional analysis shows,
some costs are fully avoided).


5     Conclusion and Further Work

The method proposed in this paper addresses the difficult problem of accounting for
knowledge about temporal causality in the RL environment. We have shown that an
expressive and concise description of temporal and causal relations in the form of
a Temporal Logic-based Causal Diagram can be integrated into the reward function
formalism. Furthermore, we have shown how the added information about temporal
and causal relations can be leveraged to expedite learning without changing the optimal
policy.
    While our method performs well in case studies, we are convinced that this work can
be continued to integrate knowledge about causality even more tightly into the reward
function. In particular, look-ahead information contained in state-values of the product
PRM may be further utilized by methods like reward shaping. We are also interested in
further exploring the interplay between probabilistic outcomes and causal information.

Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
under Grants CNS 2304863 and CNS 2339774, and in part by the Office of Naval Research (ONR)
under Grant N00014-23-1-2505. Additionally, this work has been financially supported by the
Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security 4 , one of the Research Alliance centers
within the UA Ruhr 5 .
 4
     https://rc-trust.ai
 5
     https://uaruhr.de
                                                      Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning            13


                   e1                                                             e2
                                                                                             k2


                               k1
                                                                a Æ b                    c




               (a) Map of the small office world. Shaded cells are impassable walls.

                        ¬k1 , 0         ¬e1 , 0
                          1               1

                                k1 , 0
                          q1              q2                    ⊤
                   0                                  e1
               ¬b,                  1                      ,1
                                                                                             c
          a∧       1
                                                  0.9                         b                        k2
     q0                                  e1 , 0                 q5
               b,                         0.1          ,1
                  0                                   2
                                                  e                                    XXXXk2
          1                                                 1
                                k2 , 0
¬(a ∨ b), 0               q3              q4                                G¬e1                      G¬e2
    1                               1

                        ¬k2 , 0         ¬e2 , 0                         (c) TL-CD that holds for the case study of
                                                                        the small office.
                          1               1


(b) The PRM without causal info about the
small office world.

Fig. 8. The PRM and Causal DFA for the fourth case study, alongside the office map for reference.



References

 1. Bareinboim, E., Forney, A., Pearl, J.: Bandits with unobserved confounders: A
    causal approach. In: Cortes, C., Lawrence, N., Lee, D., Sugiyama, M., Garnett, R.
    (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 28. Curran Asso-
    ciates, Inc. (2015), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/file/
    795c7a7a5ec6b460ec00c5841019b9e9-Paper.pdf
 2. Corazza, J., Aria, H.P., Neider, D., Xu, Z.: Expediting reinforcement learning by incorporating
    knowledge about temporal causality in the environment. In: Locatello, F., Didelez, V. (eds.)
    Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning. Proceedings of
    Machine Learning Research, vol. 236, pp. 643–664. PMLR (01–03 Apr 2024), https:
    //proceedings.mlr.press/v236/corazza24a.html
14                          J. Corazza et al.


                                                                        60

                       30



     Reward per step
                                                        No causal
                                                           Causal       40
                       20

                                                                        20
                       10

                       0                                                 0
                              0       2      4      6           8             0             2                  4
                                            Step            ·10     4                      Step          ·104
                            (a) Four-doors task results.                     (b) Small office world results.

Fig. 9. Comparison of task results, using the same reward per step metric averaged over 20 runs.


 3. Corazza, J., Gavran, I., Neider, D.: Reinforcement learning with stochastic reward ma-
    chines. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 36(6), 6429–6436
    (Jun 2022). https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i6.20594, https://ojs.
    aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/20594
 4. Forney, A., Pearl, J., Bareinboim, E.: Counterfactual data-fusion for online reinforcement
    learners. In: Precup, D., Teh, Y.W. (eds.) Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
    on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 70, pp. 1156–1164.
    PMLR (06–11 Aug 2017), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/forney17a.
    html
 5. den Hengst, F., François-Lavet, V., Hoogendoorn, M., et al.: Planning for potential: ef-
    ficient safe reinforcement learning. Machine Learning 111, 2255–2274 (2022). https:
    //doi.org/10.1007/s10994-022-06143-6, https://doi.org/10.1007/
    s10994-022-06143-6
 6. Icarte, R.T., Klassen, T.Q., Valenzano, R.A., McIlraith, S.A.: Reward machines: Exploiting
    reward function structure in reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/2010.03950 (2020), https:
    //arxiv.org/abs/2010.03950
 7. Lee, S., Bareinboim, E.: Structural causal bandits: Where to intervene? In: Ben-
    gio, S., Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., Garnett, R.
    (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 31. Curran Asso-
    ciates, Inc. (2018), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
    c0a271bc0ecb776a094786474322cb82-Paper.pdf
 8. Li, J., Luo, Y., Zhang, X.: Causal reinforcement learning: An instrumental variable approach.
    ERN: Computational Techniques (Topic) (2021)
 9. Lu, Y., Meisami, A., Tewari, A.: Causal Markov decision processes: Learning good inter-
    ventions efficiently. CoRR abs/2102.07663 (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.
    07663
10. Mesnard, T., Weber, T., Viola, F., Thakoor, S., Saade, A., Harutyunyan, A., Dabney, W., Steple-
    ton, T.S., Heess, N., Guez, A., Moulines, E., Hutter, M., Buesing, L., Munos, R.: Counterfac-
    tual credit assignment in model-free reinforcement learning. In: Meila, M., Zhang, T. (eds.)
    Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24
    July 2021, Virtual Event. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139, pp. 7654–7664.
    PMLR (2021), http://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/mesnard21a.html
                                                Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning   15

                                                No causal
                                                 Causal
                                      100



                    Reward per step   50




                                       0
                                            0    0.5        1       1.5        2
                                                            Step             ·104

Fig. 10. The Coffee vs. soda task. “Causal” are the results for our method, but with additional,
redundant causal knowledge added. The resulting PRM has 5 times more states than the one from
Figure 5(a), but our method achieves the same performance. Like before, “No causal” refers to
using QRM with the original PRM (which has neither causal information nor redundancy added).


11. Paliwal, Y., Roy, R., Gaglione, J.R., Baharisangari, N., Neider, D., Duan, X., Topcu, U., Xu,
    Z.: Reinforcement learning with temporal-logic-based causal diagrams. In: Holzinger, A.,
    Kieseberg, P., Cabitza, F., Campagner, A., Tjoa, A.M., Weippl, E. (eds.) Machine Learning
    and Knowledge Extraction. pp. 123–140. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023)
12. Sipser, M.: Introduction to the Theory of Computation. Course Technology, Boston, MA,
    third edn. (2013)
13. Velasquez, A., Beckus, A., Dohmen, T., Trivedi, A., Topper, N., Atia, G.K.: Learning
    probabilistic reward machines from non-markovian stochastic reward processes. CoRR
    abs/2107.04633 (2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.04633
14. Wang, L., Yang, Z., Wang, Z.: Provably efficient causal reinforcement learning with con-
    founded observational data. In: Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y.N., Liang, P.,
    Vaughan, J.W. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Confer-
    ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021,
    virtual. pp. 21164–21175 (2021), https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
    2021/hash/b0b79da57b95837f14be95aaa4d54cf8-Abstract.html
15. Xu, Z., Gavran, I., Ahmad, Y., Majumdar, R., Neider, D., Topcu, U., Wu, B.: Joint inference
    of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/1909.05912 (2019),
    http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.05912
16. Zhang, J.: Designing optimal dynamic treatment regimes: A causal reinforcement learning
    approach. In: III, H.D., Singh, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
    Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119, pp. 11012–11022.
    PMLR (13–18 Jul 2020), https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/zhang20a.
    html
16       J. Corazza et al.

    Section A contains the algorithm for the computeProduct function used in
Algorithm 1. Section B contains the proof of Theorem 1. In Section C, the PRM related
to the four-door task is depicted.


A     Computing the PRM and causal DFA product

Algorithm 2 computes the (intermediate) product B1 (B2 ) of a PRM A and causal DFA C.
This function is called in Line 1 of Algorithm 1 in Section 3. Note that this function does
not perform value iteration, this is done in Line 2 of Algorithm 1. The set of terminal
states in the intermediate product B1 is a subset of the set of terminal states in the final
product B.
    The transitions dictionary used in Algorithm 2 represents the transition and
output functions of B1 . It maps triplets ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) to to pairs (p, r), where
p = τ B1 ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )), and r = σ B1 ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )).


B    Formal Statements and Proofs

Throughout this Section, let M = (S, A, R, p, L, γ) be a labeled MDP, and let A =
(U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ) be a PRM that encodes R in M . A state s ∈ S is reachable if
there exists an attainable trajectory s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , an−1 , sn in M such that s = si for
some i = 0, . . . , n.

Lemma 1 (Transformation 1) Let A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ) be a PRM, C a DFA
with transition function δ, and A × C their parallel composition with output function
σ A×C ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) = σ(u, ℓ, u′ ). Let π ⋆ (s, (u, q)) be an optimal policy in the
product MDP M × (A × C). Then π(s, u) = π ⋆ (s, (u, F (u))) is an optimal policy in
the product MDP M × A, where Fs : U → Q is a tiebreaking reachability function that
maps u to a fixed but arbitrary q such that (s, u, q) is reachable in M × (A × C).

Proof. Since Q-learning with an ϵ-greedy exploration strategy visits every reachable
state infinitely often in the limit, we can learn a mapping Fs along with the optimal
policy for M × (A × C), by setting Fs (u) = q once we reach (s, u, q) for the first time,
and we have not yet observed (s, u, q ′ ) for any q ′ ∈ Q. Then, from the fact that

 1. Q-learning learns the optimal Q-function in all reachable states, and
 2. the optimal Q-function q ⋆ (s, u, q, a) for M × (A × C) is the same as q ⋆ (s, u, a) for
    M × A once we project out the DFA component q ∈ Q,

     it will follow that we can use Fs to construct the optimal policy in M × A.
     Let q ⋆ (s, u, a) be the optimal Q-function for M × A, and q ⋆ (s, u, q, a) the opti-
mal Q-function for M × (A × C). We will proceed by showing that q ⋆ (s, u, q1 , a) =
q ⋆ (s, u, q2 , a) for all q1 , q2 ∈ Q.
     Let q̃(s, u, q, a) = q ⋆ (s, u, a). We will show that q̃ is a solution to the state value
Bellman optimality equation for M × (A × C), given in Equation 3. In the following
formulas, let ℓ = L(s, a, s′ ).
                                   Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning          17

    Input :PRM A, minimal causal DFA C with rejecting sink states Qr.s.
1   appears ← A.appears ∪ C.appears ;                 // M.appears is the set of
     relevant atomic propositions in M.
 2 pairToSelfStateMap ← {} ;           // Dictionary mapping pairs of states
     in A and C to a single state in B′
 3 selfToPairStateMap ← {}
 4 nonTerminalStates ← ∅ ;            // Contains non-terminal states of the
     intermediate product PRM.
 5 terminalStates ← ∅ ;                    // Contains terminal states of the
     intermediate product PRM.
 6 transitions ← {} ;               // Dictionary representation of τ and σ
     functions of B′ .
 7 stateCounter ← 0
 8 for u in A.states do
  9     for q in C.states do
10          pairToSelfStateMap[(u, q)] ← stateCounter
11          selfToPairStateMap[stateCounter] ← (u, q)
12          if u in A.terminalStates then
13               terminalStates ← {stateCounter} ∪ terminalStates
14          end
15          else
16               nonTerminalStates ← {stateCounter} ∪ nonTerminalStates
17          end
18          stateCounter ← stateCounter + 1
19      end
20 end
21 for u in A.nonTerminalStates do
22      for q in C.states do
23          state ← pairToSelfStateMap[(u, q)]
24          transitions[state] ← {}
25          for inputSymbol in GENERATE I NPUTS(appears) do
26               inputSymbolPrm ← A.appears ∩ inputSymbol
27               inputSymbolDfa ← C.appears ∩ inputSymbol
28               transitions[state][inputSymbol] ← {}
29               nextDfaState ← C.transitions[q][inputSymbolDfa]
30               for nextPrmState in A.transitions[u][inputSymbolPrm] do
 31                  nextState ← pairToSelfStateMap[(nextPrmState, nextDfaState)]
 32                  probability, reward ←
                       A.transitions[u][inputSymbolPrm][nextPrmState]
 33                  if nextDfaState in Qr.s. then
 34                       reward ← m
 35                  end
 36                  transitions[state][inputSymbol][nextState] ← (probability, reward)
37               end
38          end
39      end
40 end
41 return PRM(transitions, appears, terminalStates)
                       Algorithm 2: computeProduct(A, C)
18         J. Corazza et al.



q ⋆ (s, u, q, a) =
        X                                                                                             
     =        p(s′ , u′ , q ′ | s, u, q, a) σ A×C ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) + γ max
                                                                                ′
                                                                                   q ⋆ ′
                                                                                      (s , u′ ′ ′
                                                                                             , q , a )
                                                                              a ∈A
         s′ ∈S
         u′ ∈U
         q ′ ∈Q
         X                                                                              
     =            p(s′ , u′ | s, u, a) σ A (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γ max
                                                            ′
                                                               q ⋆ ′
                                                                  (s , u′
                                                                          , δ(q, ℓ), a′
                                                                                        )
                                                          a ∈A
         s′ ∈S
         u′ ∈U
                                                                                                     (3)
     The second equality holds because

 1. p(s′ , u′ , q ′ | s, u, q, a) = 0 for δ(q, ℓ) ̸= q ′ ,
 2. p(s′ , u′ , q ′ | s, u, q, a) = p(s′ , u′ | s, u, a) for δ(q, ℓ) = q ′ , and
 3. σ A×C ((u, q), ℓ, (u′ , q ′ )) = σ A (u, ℓ, u′ ).

     by definition of A × C. Equation 3 shows that the Bellman optimality equation for
q ⋆ (s, u, q, a) reduces to the Bellman optimality equation for q ⋆ (s, u, a). More precisely,
the parameters for the system of nonlinear equations given in Equation 3 are the same
as those in the system for q ⋆ (s, u, a), except that each individual equation is repeated
|Q| times (once for every DFA state). Therefore, we have q̃(s, u, q, a) = q ⋆ (s, u, a) as a
solution.
     Now all that is left is the fact that Q-learning in M × (A × C) will converge to the
optimal Q-function that is independent of the q ∈ Q component, and that Q-learning
will converge to the same Q-function in M × A. Values in unreachable states will remain
unaffected by learning updates, and will not affect the return from the optimal policy.

Definition 4 (Unreachable PRM state). Let A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ) be a PRM. A
                                                                                   λ
state u ∈ U is M -unreachable if for every input sequence λ s.t. A −       → u (A transitions
into u upon reading λ) we have that every trajectory s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , an−1 , sn such that
L(s0 , a0 , s1 , . . . , an−1 , sn ) = λ is unattainable in M (has probability 0 according to
the transition function p of M ).

Lemma 2 (Transformation 2) Let α ∈ R be an arbitrary real. Let A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ,
τ, σ, F ) be a PRM, and let V ⊂ U be a set of M -unreachable PRM states of A. Let
                                                ′
A′ = A/V → α = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ ∪ {α}, τ, σ A , F ) be a PRM obtained by setting
the output of every transition into an unreachable state u ∈ V to α. In other words,
   ′
σ A (u, u′ ) = α for all u ∈ U and u ∈ V . Let π ⋆ (s, u) be an optimal policy in the
product MDP M × A′ . Then π ⋆ (s, u) is also an optimal policy in the product MDP
M × A.

Proof. MDPs M ×A and M ×A′ share the same state space S×U , probabilistic transition
function p, and initial state distribution. They may differ only in their (Markovian) reward
function, specifically, on transitions into unreachable states (s, u) ∈ S × U for all s ∈ S
and u ∈ V ⊂ U . By definition 4, trajectories that induce a PRM transition into an
M -unreachable state in A are unattainable.
                                         Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning                      19

    This proof proceeds similarly to proof of Lemma 1, except it is even easier because
we can work with a system of linear (not optimality) equations. The statement of the
lemma concerning optimality will follow from the general reduction, i.e. the lemma
holds for an arbitrary policy π not just the optimal one. In Equation 4 we set out the
system of Bellman equations in M × A′ , and show that it reduces to the one for M × A.

      ′
qπM ×A (s, u, a) =
                                                                                                            !
                                          A′                                             ′
              X                                             X
                         ′       ′                  ′                     ′
          =           p(s , u | s, u, a) σ (u, ℓ, u ) + γ           π(a       | s )qπM ×A (s′ , u′ , a′ )
                                                                                  ′

              s′ ∈S                                         a′ ∈A
               ′
              u ∈U
                                                                                                              !
                X                                              X                             ′
                             ′       ′                  ′                     ′
          =                                    A
                         p(s , u | s, u, a) σ (u, ℓ, u ) + γ           π(a        | s )qπM ×A (s′ , u′ , a′ )
                                                                                      ′

                s′ ∈S                                          a′ ∈A
              u′ ∈U \V
                                                                                                          !
                                          A′                                             ′
              X                                             X
                         ′   ′                     ′                    ′
          +           p(s , u | s, u, a) σ (u, ℓ, u ) + γ           π(a       | s )qπM ×A (s′ , u′ , a′ )
                                                                                  ′

              s′ ∈S                                         a′ ∈A
               ′
              u ∈V
                                                                                         (4)
    If u is an M -reachable state, the second sum vanishes because pM ×A (s′ , u′ |
s, u, a) = pM (s′ , | s, a) · τ A (u, L(s, a, s′ ), u′ ) = 0 for u′ ∈ V (otherwise, u′ would
be M -reachable if u was M reachable). Therefore, solutions in rows corresponding to
M -reachable states are independent of rows corresponding to M -unreachable states,
and the equations are the same as in the system for q M ×A , where the second sum also
vanishes. Therefore, as Q-learning explores all reachable states infinitely often, and the
reachable states in both product MDPs are the same and share the same Q-function,
Q-learning will find the same optimal policy in both MDPs. The values of Q-functions
corresponding to unreachable states are of no consequence.

    Definition 5 captures the structure of the set of M -unreachable states in a PRM A
induced by rejecting sinks states of a causal DFA. This property of a set of unreachable
states V models the deterministic transition function of a causal DFA.

Definition 5 (Dependent Set of Unreachable PRM States). Let A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ,
σ, F ) be a PRM, and V a subset of M -unreachable states in A. We say that V is
a dependent set of M -unreachable states in A if it is a set of M -unreachable states
and the following property holds for all labels ℓ ∈ 2AP and states u ∈ U A : (∃u′ ∈
V ) τ A (u, ℓ, u′ ) > 0 =⇒ (∀u′′ ̸∈ V ) τ A (u, ℓ, u′′ ) = 0.

    Intuitively, a set of M -unreachable states V is dependent if it is not possible to
transition into both V and U \ V from any u ∈ U .

Lemma 3 (Transformation 3) Let A = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ) be a PRM, V a depen-
dent set of M -unreachable states in A, and m = −1 − maxr∈Γ A |r| − maxu∈U A v ⋆ (u).
Let B1 = A/V → m be a PRM that mirrors the output of A, (except on transitions
into unreachable states in V where the output is m), and B2 = (−A)/V → m a
20       J. Corazza et al.

PRM that negates the output of A (except on transitions into unreachable states in V
where the output is m). Let u0 ∈ U be a state in A such that vB⋆ 1 (u) = vB⋆ 2 (u) = 0.
Let B = (U, uI , 2AP , Γ, τ, σ, F ∪ {u0 }) be a PRM obtained by adding u0 to the set of
terminal states in A. Let π ⋆ (s, u) be an optimal policy in the product MDP M × B. Then
π ⋆ (s, u) is also an optimal policy in the product MDP M × A.

Proof. Let π be a policy in M × B. We will show that vπM ×A = vπM ×B , i.e. that an
arbitrary policy π has the same value in M × A. From there, it follows that if π is optimal
in M × B, then it is optimal in M × A.
    To make analysis easier, we will model terminal states as absorbing states (sinks
with output 0). For easier notation, s̃ will refer to states in S M , and s = (s̃, u) will refer
to states in S M ×A .
    We will first show vπM ×A (s0 ) = vπM ×B (s0 ) for every state s0 = (s̃, u0 ). We have
 M ×B 0
vπ     (s ) = 0 because s0 is an absorbing state in M × B. We must show that
 M ×A 0
vπ     (s ) = 0. Intuitively, this is the case because in M × A, the expected return
when starting in s0 = (s̃, u0 ) and following an arbitrary policy π is bounded with 0 from
above and below. It is enough to show that vπM ×B1 (s0 ) = 0, because by the proof of
Lemma 2 we have vπM ×A (s0 ) = vπM ×B1 (s0 ). We will show this via Equation 5.

                         0 = −vB⋆ 2 (u0 ) ≤ vπM ×B1 (s0 ) ≤ vB⋆ 1 (u0 ) = 0                         (5)
    Equalities in Equation 5 hold by assumption. The second inequality holds trivially.
The first inequality holds because the “pessimistic” machine B2 realizes the minimal
value of every state (negated to obtain the discounted return in terms of B1 ). More
precisely, for a given state s = (s̃, u) we have
                            X
           vB⋆ 2 (u) = max      τ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ )(σ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γvB⋆ 2 (u′ ))
                         ℓ∈2AP
                                 u′ ∈U
                     = (⋆)
                                          X
                     =       max               τ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ )(σ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γvB⋆ 2 (u′ ))
                             ℓ∈2AP        ′                                                         (6)
                         τ (u,ℓ,u )=0 u ∈U
                                ′

                            ∀u′ ∈V
                                          X
                     =       max               τ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ )(−σ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γvB⋆ 2 (u′ ))
                             ℓ∈2AP        ′
                         τ (u,ℓ,u )=0 u ∈U
                                ′

                            ∀u′ ∈V

     and similarly
                                  X
            vB⋆ 1 (u) = max               τ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ )(σ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γvB⋆ 2 (u′ ))
                          ℓ∈2AP
                                  u′ ∈U
                                                                                                    (7)
                                          X
                     =        max               τ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ )(σ B1 (u, ℓ, u′ ) + γvB⋆ 1 (u′ ))
                              ℓ∈2AP      ′
                          τ (u,ℓ,u′ )=0 u ∈U
                                ′
                             ∀u ∈V
.
    (⋆): By assumption, when τ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ ) > 0 for any u′ ∈ V then τ B2 (u, ℓ, u′′ ) = 0
for all u′′ ̸∈ V . Intuitively, if reading input ℓ from state u induces a transition to
                                     Temporal Causality and Reinforcement Learning           21

u′ ∈ V with positive probability in B2 , since the transitions of the causal DFA are not
probabilistic, every other state u′′ such that τ B2 (u, ℓ, u′′ ) > 0 must also transition into
the same rejecting sink state in the causal DFA. In that case, σ B2 (u, ℓ, u′ ) = m for all u′ ,
which is lower than any possible immediate reward and resulting state value. Therefore,
the maximum is not attained for the input ℓ. Similar reasoning is applied in Equation 7.
    Equation 6 and Equation 7 show that −vB⋆ 2 bounds the value of any policy in M × B1
from below, that is −vB⋆ 2 (u) ≤ vπM ×B1 (s). The argument is that vB⋆ 2 is a solution to the
Bellman optimality equation in B1 with negated rewards. In particular, Equation 6 and
Equation 7 show that one can disregard transitions into unreachable states in V when
computing state values. In that case, −vB⋆ 2 is the pessimal state value in B1 . Intuitively,
one attains a discounted return of −vB⋆ 2 (u) when starting in u and minimizing the
expected discounted sum of rewards along transitions in B1 , while ignoring transitions
into V .
    We proceed to show vπM ×A (s) = vπM ×B (s) in all components (not just for s = s0 ).
    When we fix an arbitrary policy π, we obtain the immediate reward vector RA;π          s
   B;π                                         A;π     B;π
(Rs ) and probabilistic transition matrix Ps,s    ′ (Ps,s′ ) for M × A (M × B).

    The state value Bellman equation for π in M × A can then be expressed in matrix
form as in Equation 8 (and similarly for M × B).

                                  vπA = RA;π + γP A;π vπA                                   (8)
    We proceed to show that vπB also solves Equation 8, that is that Equation 9 holds.

                                  vπB = RA;π + γP A;π vπB                                   (9)
                                                                                 0          0
    We already know that the Equation 9 holds in rows corresponding to s ∈ {(s̃, u ) :
s̃ ∈ S M }, as we have shown vπA (s0 ) = vπB (s0 ) = 0. For s ∈ S \ {(s̃, u0 ) : s̃ ∈ S M },
we have RA;πs   = RB;π
                    s   (B does not change the immediate reward on transitions from
      0                            A;π       B;π
s ̸= s ). However, we also have Ps,:    = Ps,:    (M × B transitions in the same way as
                   0
M × A from s ̸= s ).

    Now we can prove Theorem 1.

Proof. Algorithm 1 starts with a PRM A and applies a series transformations in order to
obtain a new PRM B. Then, it runs QRM for (M, B) instead of (M, A). Lemmas 1, 2,
and 3 show that the optimal policy either remains the same when the transformations are
applied (Transformation 2, 3), or that the optimal policy for the initial PRM can be easily
recovered from the transformed PRM (Transformation 1). Line 1 applies Transformation
1 and 2. Lines 2-6 apply Transformation 3. Finally, convergence to optimal policy of
Algorithm 1 then follows from the convergence to optimal policy of QRM.


C    Four Doors Case Study

Figure 11 depicts the PRM for the 4-door task. As can be seen, increasing the number of
doors leads to an exponential increase in the number of states.
              22         J. Corazza et al.




                                                                                               ¬(c ∨ d), 0
                                                                                                   1
                                                                    ), 0
                                                              (c ∨ d
                                                      b∧¬                                                                 c¬d, 0
                                                                     1                                  q5
                                                                     d, 0                                                      1
                    ¬(b ∨ c ∨ d), 0
                          1     q1                                            1                                                    d,
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                              1
                                                                    c∧                                  q7
                                            ,0                                    ¬d                                                                       q11
                                         c)                                         ,0                           b¬                                                      ¬d, 0
                                                                                                                          c,
                              0        b∨                                     1                                              0                                           1
                            d),                                                                                      1
                                   ((       1                                                  ¬(b ∨ c), 0
                         c∨       a¬             ¬(a ∨ b ∨ d), 0                                                          d, 0
   ,0                                                                                              1             b¬
 ∨ d)
                                                       1                                                                     1            q12             1      d, 0
                    ¬(b       1                                                                                      c,
        0.9             ∨                                             a¬((b ∨ d), 0                     q6                0
a¬(c                a∧                                 q3
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                        1                                      d,        ¬c, 0
                                                                                                                     d,                              c,
                                                                                                                          0         1                    0
                                                                                               ¬(b ∨ d), 0                                1      1
                           d, 0                                                                      1           1
                         c¬                                                        d,        b¬
                             1                   ¬(a ∨ b ∨ c), 0                        0       d,                                                                        true
                                                       1         1                                 0                                             b, 0
               q0                                                                            1                                            q13                    q15
                                  d, 0                                                                             0
                                                                                                              a¬b,                                   1
                                   1                                               c, 0                                   ¬(
                                                       q4                                               q10      1
                                                                                     1                                        a∨         ¬b, 0
  ¬(a ∨ b ∨ c ∨ d), 0
                                                                                                                                 d)
                                                                                   b¬                                                                                             0
            1                                                                                                                      ,0     1                              a¬d,
                                                                                                                  q8     1
                                   b∧                                                 c,
                                        ¬(                                               0     ¬(a ∨ b), 0                                                                  1
                                                                                   1
                                          d)                                                       1


                                                               a¬(c ∨ d), 0
                                       c∨                                                                                                                a, 0
                                         1                                                                                                                      1
                                                 ,0                                                                           b,                                        a¬
                                                        0.1                                                                      0                                         c,
                                                                                                    0                     1                                             1     0
                                                                                               d,
                                                                                             c¬
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                  q9
                                                                                             d, 0                                     c, 0
                                                                                               1
                                                       q2                                                     ¬(a ∨ c), 0 1                       q14
                                                                                                                  1

                                                 ¬(a ∨ c ∨ d), 0                                                                                 ¬a, 0
                                                       1                                                                                          1




                                  Fig. 11. The PRM without causal info about the four-door task
